:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:
:   Earth's Dreamlands    :  Info on: RPG's,  :(313)558-5024 : area code    :
:RPGNet World HQ & Archive: Drugs, Industrial :(313)558-5517 : changes to   :
:  1000's of text files   :  music, Fiction,  :InterNet      : (810) after  :
:   No Elite / No porn    :   HomeBrew Beer.  :rpgnet@aol.com: Dec 1,1993   :
:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:.:

 
=======================> GET FUDGE.RULES
 
Getting File: SERVER:[GRASS]FUDGE.RULES;4
 
Subject: FUDGE July93: Part 1 of 4

          FUDGE: Freeform, Universal, Donated Gaming Engine
                   A Free Role-playing Game (RPG).
                        By Steffan O'Sullivan
                        Version: July 4, 1993

"Back Cover Blurb"
 ----------------

FUDGE is a freeform RPG "engine."  This means that the rules are
guidelines, not unbreakable laws.  Each GM *must* do a certain amount
of work customizing the rules to her tastes, supplying the body of the
gaming "vehicle" - FUDGE is just the engine.  This is unavoidable in a
freeform game that is trying to appeal to a wide variety of gamers.
Fortunately, this also means that supplements from *any* game company
are compatible with FUDGE!

FUDGE is specifically for people who want a good bedrock to build
their own system on.  If every commercial RPG details certain things
in ways you don't like, then FUDGE may be what you're looking for.  If
you have created a great game setting (or translated one from
fiction), but no other game system's rules seem to do it justice,
perhaps FUDGE can help you.

If, on the other hand, you demand fully fleshed-out rules or a world
background detailed by a game designer, then you may wish to read no
further . . .

In its current edition, FUDGE is intended for experienced Game
Masters.  That is, at this time there is no introductory "What is
role-playing" section, nor detailed explanations of how to handle any
given situation.  However, a glossary of FUDGE-specific terms is
presented at the beginning of each new major topic.  The game can work
with novice *players*, as long as the GM is experienced.

Note: the word "freeform" in this game has nothing to do with the live
role-playing style known in Australia as free-form.  In FUDGE, the
word simply means a flexible, simple, casual set of RPG rules,
requiring much to be filled in and improvised by the GM.

======================================================================

Legal Notice
------------

Version: July 4, 1993

FUDGE is copyright 1992, 1993 by Steffan O'Sullivan.  It may be freely
copied and distributed by any means desired.  This legal notice must
be included with each copy of FUDGE.  No charge may be made for FUDGE
beyond a maximum US$6 fee (at 1993 rates) for materials and shipping,
without written permission from the author.

A publisher who wishes to include FUDGE in a book of copyrighted
source material or adventures may do so, so long as (1) the
publisher's copyrighted material is longer than the amount of FUDGE
material included, (2) this legal notice and at least Chapter 1 of
FUDGE are included, (3) the words in this legal notice and those in
Chapter 1 of FUDGE are not changed in any way, and (4) there is no
extra charge for including FUDGE in the book.

FUDGE was first published in 1992 on internet, and was written by
Steffan O'Sullivan (sos@oz.plymouth.edu) with an extensive amount of
high-quality input from Andy Skinner.  Other valued contributors
include Martin Bergendahl, Thomas Brettinger, Robert Bridson, Travis
Casey, Paul Jason Clegg, Peter F. Delaney, Jay Doane, Brian Edmonds,
Shawn Garbett, Ed Heil, Bernard Hsiung, John H. Kim, Christian
Otkjaer, Bill Seurer, Larry Smith, Stephan Szabo, and others on
rec.games.design on internet.

Groo the Wanderer (TM) is a trademark of Sergio Aragones, and use of
the name does not challenge the trademark status in any way.

======================================================================

Terminology Notes:
-----------------

To avoid confusion, "he, him," etc., are used to describe a player and
PC, and "she, her," etc., are used to describe a Game Master and NPC.

FUDGE is divided into six Chapters, each of which is divided into
Sections.  The decimal point in Section numbers is a true decimal.
For example, Section 2.35 comes between Section 2.3 and Section 2.4.


Table of Contents
=================

1  FUDGE Overview
2  Character Creation
    2.1  Character Creation Terms
    2.2  Levels
    2.3  Traits
          2.31  Attributes
          2.32  Skills
          2.33  Gifts
          2.34  Faults
          2.35  Personality
    2.4  Allocating Traits
    2.5  Subjective Character Creation
    2.6  Objective Character Creation
          2.61  Attributes
          2.62  Skills
          2.63  Gifts & Faults
          2.64  Trading Traits
    2.7  Uncommitted Traits
    2.8  Random Character Creation
    2.9  Minimizing Abuse
3  Supernormal Powers
    3.1  Supernormal Power Terms
    3.2  At Character Creation
          3.21  Powers Available
          3.22  Associated Skills
          3.23  Combat Powers
    3.3  Non-humans
          3.31  Strength and Mass
          3.32  Scale Correlations
          3.33  Cost of Scale
          3.34  Racial Bonuses and Penalties
    3.4  Legendary Heroes
    3.5  Magic
    3.6  Miracles
    3.7  Psi
    3.8  Superpowers
    3.9  Cybernetic Enhancements
4  Action Resolution
    4.1  Action Resolution Terms
    4.2  Rolling the Dice
          4.21  Using a Table
          4.22  Tableless Dice Method
          4.23  Success Rates
    4.3  Action Modifiers
    4.4  Unopposed Actions
    4.5  Opposed Actions
    4.6  Combat
          4.61  Melee Combat
          4.62  Multiple Combatants in Melee
          4.63  Ranged Combat
          4.64  Non-human Scale in Combat
    4.7  Damage and Healing
          4.71  Subjective Damage System
          4.72  Objective Damage System
          4.73  Knockout Damage
          4.74  Healing
    4.8  Critical Results
    4.9  NPC Reactions
5  Character Development
    5.1  Subjective Character Development
    5.2  Objective Character Development
6  Tips and Examples
    6.1  GM Tips
    6.2  Character Sheet Example
    6.3  Character Examples
    6.4  Animal & Creature Examples


1  FUDGE Overview
=================

FUDGE (Freeform, Universal Donated Gaming Engine) is a roleplaying
game.  The basic rules of FUDGE contain no world background
whatsoever.  They may be used with *any* gaming genre, and some
customization tips are included.  However, those using basic FUDGE
rules must do a lot of work to create - or adapt - a world suitable
for gaming.

FUDGE may be used as an engine for other game designers, however.  It
may be used by any publisher who has a good world to game in.  FUDGE
is ideal for this because its word-based descriptive levels are easily
translated to any other game.  If you are reading this overview in
such a book, it may or may not include all the FUDGE rules - the
publisher is free to sum up or omit certain sections.  This overview
will tell you what you are missing in such a case, so you can judge if
it's worth hunting down the full FUDGE rules.

The basic premise of FUDGE character creation is freedom of choice.
If an existing game has a brilliant game mechanism in an otherwise
lackluster set of rules, you can easily import the brilliance into
FUDGE without bringing along the mediocrity.  Do you like the way game
X handles psi, game Y combat, and game Z sanity?  Use them all freely
with FUDGE.

Every GM has the right to add or delete attributes, skills, or other
character traits.  While a game designer may strongly feel that
certain attributes are necessary in her system, and others are not,
you may disagree.  FUDGE allows you the freedom to customize any game
to your tastes, and includes many examples of character creation,
using different collections of traits.

In addition to supplying tips on how to include or delete character
traits, two different systems of character creation are included in
FUDGE: subjective and objective.

Chapters 2 and 3 cover character creation in FUDGE.  The latter is
only needed if you are dealing with powers beyond the realistic human
range: magic, super heroes, aliens, psi, etc.

FUDGE has a simple, consistent action resolution system: roll two
dice; adjust your trait level up or down according to the dice result;
determine how well you succeeded or failed.  If two or more characters
can influence the outcome of an action, they all roll, and results are
compared.  FUDGE includes two different ways to read the dice: one
requires a table on the character sheet, the other does not.

Combat is just an extension of the action resolution system.  Two
different systems of damage tracking are included in FUDGE: subjective
and objective.

Throughout FUDGE, the GM is given options for a more realistic
campaign, or a more "epic" (or "legendary" or "cinematic") campaign.
Any genre can be played at any point between the realistic-legendary
opposing stances.

Experience is very straightforward in FUDGE.  Two different systems
are included, subjective and objective, of course.

The basic FUDGE rules can be obtained free via anonymous ftp on the
Internet at soda.berkeley.edu in the directory pub/fudge/rules.  Many
FUDGE options, such as a complete working magic or psionic system, can
also be found at that site, in other /pub/fudge directories.  (These
samples and options are occasionally referred to in the FUDGE rules as
the Addenda.)

The current version of FUDGE and the Addenda (on Macintosh or IBM
diskette, or nicely typeset hard copy,) can also be obtained from
Dream Quest Publishing, P.O. Box 838, Randolph, MA 02368.  Write for
current shipping and handling charges.


2  Character Creation
=====================

2.1  Character Creation Terms
-----------------------------

Trait: anything that describes a character.  A trait can be an
     attribute, skill, inherited gift, fault, supernormal power, or
     any other feature that might describe a character.  The GM is the
     ultimate authority on what is an attribute and what is a skill,
     gift, etc.

Attribute: any trait that *everyone* has, in some degree or other.
     See Section 2.31, Attributes, for a sample list of attributes.
     On a scale of Terrible...Fair...Superb, the average human will
     have an attribute at Fair.  If the default for an unlisted trait
     is Poor, it's probably a skill.  If the default is non-existent,
     it's either a skill or a gift.

Skill: any trait that isn't an attribute, but can be improved through
     practice.  The default for an unlisted skill is usually Poor,
     though that can vary up or down a little depending on the skill.

Gift: any trait that isn't an attribute or skill, but is something
     positive for the character.  Some GMs will define a certain trait
     as a gift, while others will define the same trait as an
     attribute.  In general, if the trait doesn't easily fit the
     Terrible...Fair...Superb scale, it's probably a gift.

Fault: any trait that limits a character's actions, or earns him a bad
     reaction from other people.

Supernormal Power: although technically gifts, supernormal powers are
     treated separately in Chapter 3.

Level: each trait is described by one of seven adjectives.  These
     seven descriptive words represent *levels* a trait may be at.  In
     addition, the Objective Character Creation method grants the
     player free levels, and demands he keep track of them.  In this
     case, one level is required to raise a trait to the next better
     adjective.

2.2  Levels
-----------

FUDGE uses ordinary words to describe various traits of a character.
The following terms of a seven-level ascending sequence are suggested:

     Terrible
     Poor
     Mediocre
     Fair
     Good
     Great
     Superb

These levels should be written on each character sheet for easy
reference.

The GM may alter this list in any way she desires, including expanding
or shrinking it.  For example, if Superb just doesn't sound right to
you, then use Awesome or even Way Cool if desired.  Some people have
problems with the words Mediocre and Fair - change them to whatever
terms make sense to you.  These seven terms will be used in the rules,
however, for clarity.

The best way to remember the order is to compare adjacent words.  If,
as a beginner, your eventual goal is to become an excellent cook, for
example, ask yourself if you'd rather be called a Mediocre cook or a
Poor cook?  Would you rather be called a Fair cook or a Mediocre cook.
And so on.

There is an additional level that can be used in FUDGE, but is not
listed above: Legendary, which is beyond Superb.  Those with Legendary
Strength, for example, are in the 99.9th percentile, and their names
can be found in any book of world records.

IMPORTANT NOTE: not every GM will allow PCs to become Legendary!  Even
in games that *do* include the Legendary level, it is not recommended
that any character be allowed to *start* the game as Legendary.
Regular use of Legendary tends to dilute Superb, which is unfortunate.
Superb represents the 98th to 99.9th percentile of any given trait,
which should be enough for any beginning PC!  Of course, if a player
character gets a bit overconfident, meeting an *NPC* Legendary
swordswoman can be a grounding experience. . .

If someone really *has* to begin play as a Legendary swordsman, strong
man, etc., doing the GM's laundry for a half a year or so (in advance,
of course) should be sufficient bribe to be allowed to start at that
level.  Of course, working towards Legendary makes a great campaign
goal, and so PCs may rise to that height, given enough playing time
and a generous GM.

2.3  Traits
-----------

Traits are divided into Attributes, Skills, Gifts, Faults and
Supernormal Powers.  Not every GM will have all five types of traits
in her game.  These traits are defined in Section 2.1, Character
Creation Terms.

2.31  Attributes
----------------

Gamers often disagree on how many attributes a game should have.  Some
prefer few attributes, others many.  Even those that agree on the
number of attributes may disagree on the selection.  While FUDGE
discusses some attributes (Strength, Fatigue, Constitution, etc.) in
later sections, none of these are mandatory.  The only attribute that
is assumed is Damage Capacity, and even that is needed only if you use
the Objective Damage system (Section 4.72).

Damage Capacity may be called Hit Points, if desired.  It may simply
be part of Constitution (or Hardiness, Fitness, Health, Body, etc.) as
a single attribute, or be a separate trait - see Section 6.3,
Character Examples.  In FUDGE, Damage Capacity only determines how
wounds affect a character, and is an attribute on the Terrible ...
Fair ... Superb scale.  See Section 4.72, Objective Damage System, for
details.

Here is a partial list of attributes in use by other games; select to
your taste, or skip these altogether:

Body: Agility, Aim, Appearance, Balance, Brawn, Build, Constitution,
Coordination, Deftness, Dexterity, Endurance, Fatigue, Fitness,
Health, Hit Points, Manual Dexterity, Muscle, Nimbleness, Quickness,
Physical, Reflexes, Size, Smell, Speed, Stamina, Strength, Wound
Resistance, Zip, and so on.

Mind: Cunning, Education, Intelligence, Knowledge, Learning,
Mechanical, Memory, Mental, Mental Strength, Perception, Reasoning,
Smarts, Technical, Wit, and so on.

Soul: Channeling, Charisma, Charm, Chutzpah, Common Sense, Coolness,
Disposition, Drive, Ego, Empathy, Fate, Honor, Intuition, Luck, Magic
Resistance, Magic Potential, Magical Ability, Power, Presence, Psyche,
Sanity, Self Discipline, Social, Spiritual, Style, Will, Wisdom, and
so on, and so on!

Other: Rank, Status, Wealth.

Note that most games combine many of these attributes, while others
treat some of them as gifts or even skills.  In FUDGE, if you have the
desire, you can even split these attributes into smaller ones: Lifting
Strength, Carrying Strength, Damage-dealing Strength, etc.

At this point, the GM might decide how many attributes she deems
necessary - or she might leave it up to each player.  (Commercial
games range from 0, 1, 2, 3, etc., to over 20.)  See Section 6.3,
Character Examples, for some possibilities.

2.32  Skills
------------

Skills are not related to attributes or their levels in FUDGE.
Players offended by this are encouraged to design their characters
logically - a character with a lot of Good physical skills should have
better than average physical attributes, for example.  On the other
hand, FUDGE allows a player to create someone like Groo the Wanderer
(TM), who is very clumsy yet extremely skilled with his swords.

The GM should then decide what level of skill depth she wants.  Are
skills broad categories such as "Social skills," or moderately broad
abilities, such as "Inspire People, Parley, and Market Savvy," or are
they very specific abilities such as "Barter, Seduce, Repartee,
Persuade, Fast-Talk, Bully, Grovel, Carouse, Flatter, Bribe," etc.?

Note that an attribute is, in some ways, a *very* broad skill group,
and skills may be ignored altogether if desired.

An area that must have special consideration is combat skills.  The
broadest possible category is simply that: Combat Skills.  A very
broad range might break that down to Melee Weapons, Unarmed Combat,
and Missile Weapons.  A somewhat narrower approach would break down
Melee Weapons into Small Melee Weapons (knives, blackjacks, etc.),
Medium Melee Weapons (one-handed swords, axes, maces, etc.) and Large
Melee Weapons (polearms, spears, battle-axes, two-handed swords,
etc.).  Or each group in parentheses could be listed as a separate
skill for a very precise list of skills, and someone skilled at using
a broadsword might know nothing about using a saber, for example.

Each choice has its merits.  Broad skill groups that include many
subskills make for an easy character sheet and fairly competent
characters, while specific skills allow fine-tuning a character to a
precise degree.

See Section 6.3, Character Examples, for an idea of how broadly or
finely skills can be defined in a game.

2.33  Gifts
-----------

A gift is a positive trait that doesn't seem to fit the Terrible...
Fair... Superb scale that attributes and skills fall into.  However,
this will vary from GM to GM: a photographic memory might be a gift to
one GM, while it will be a Superb Memory attribute to another.  Some
GMs will define Charisma as an attribute, while others might define it
as a gift.  To one Game Master, a character either has Night Vision or
he doesn't; another will allow characters to take different levels of
it.

Or gifts might come in levels, but the levels don't coincide with the
levels used by other traits.  For example, Status might be three- or
four-tiered, or even nine-tiered instead of fitting into the seven
levels of attributes and skills.  Wealth might come only in five
different levels - whatever each GM desires.

The choice is yours.  Not every GM will have gifts in her game.

Supernormal powers, such as the ability to cast magic spells, fly,
read minds, etc., are technically very powerful gifts, but are handled
separately in Chapter 3.  Likewise, traits above the human norm, such
as a very strong fantasy or alien race, are treated by definition as
supernormal powers.

In general, if a gift isn't written on the character sheet, the
character doesn't have it.

2.34  Faults
------------

Faults are anything that makes life more difficult for a character.
The primary faults are those that restrict a character's actions or
earn him a bad reaction from chance-met NPCs.  Various attitudes,
neuroses and phobias are faults; so are physical disabilities and
social stigmas.  There are heroic faults, too: a code of honor and
inability to tell a lie restrict your actions significantly, but are
not signs of flawed personality - see the next section.

Some faults are superfaults: the converse of supernormal powers, such
as a trait far below the human norm (e.g., a pixie's Strength).  These
are discussed in Section 3.1, Supernormal Power Terms.

2.35  Personality
-----------------

A character's personality may or may not be represented as an actual
trait.  Courage might be an attribute, a gift or even a fault.  In the
first case, Superb Courage and Terrible Courage have obvious meanings.
As a gift, high courage might give the character a positive reaction
from people he meets.  These would either have to see him being
courageous, or have heard of his deeds, of course.

However, both very courageous and very cowardly might be faults
because they could limit a character's actions.  A very courageous
character might not run away from a fight even if it were in his best
interest, while a cowardly one would have a hard time staying in a
fight even if he stood to gain by staying.

Or a character's level of courage might not be a quantified trait at
all, but something the player simply knows.  "Moose is very brave," a
player might jot down, and that is that.  It doesn't have to count as
a high attribute, gift or fault.

This can hold true for most personality traits - ask the GM how she
wants to handle specific temperament traits.  However they are
handled, most characters benefit by having their personalities fleshed
out a little.

2.4  Allocating Traits
----------------------

Character creation in FUDGE is written as if the player is *designing*
the character.  The GM may allow randomly determined traits if she
desires - a suggested method is given in Section 2.8, Random Character
Creation.

There are no mandatory traits in FUDGE.  The GM should inform the
players which traits she expects to be most important, and the players
may suggest others to the GM for her approval.  The GM may even make a
template, if desired: a collection of traits she deems important (with
room for customization), and let the players define the level of each
trait.

When a character is created, the player should define as many
character traits as he finds necessary - which may or may not coincide
with a GM-determined list.

Any traits that are not defined will be at one of three default
levels:

For attributes: Fair.

For most skills: Poor (easier skills might be Mediocre, while harder
ones are at Terrible).

For most gifts, supernormal powers and certain GM-defined skills: Non-
Existent.  (That is, it is non-existent to a given character.  The
trait itself exists in *some* character, somewhere!)

Each player should expect the GM to modify his character after
creation - it's the nature of the game.  The GM should expect to
review each character before play.  It would, in fact, be best if the
characters were made in the presence of the GM so she can answer
questions during the process.

2.5  Subjective Character Creation
----------------------------------

The easiest way to create a character in FUDGE is for the player
simply to write down everything about the character that he feels is
important.  Any attribute or skill should be rated using one of the
levels Terrible through Superb, as described is Section 2.2, Levels.

The GM may also tell the player in advance that his character can only
be Superb in one or two traits, and Great in another 3 to 5 traits.
(This may be broken down: 1 Superb attribute, and 1 Superb skill, for
example.)  This limitation helps the player define the focus of the
character a bit better: what is his best trait (what can he do best)?
If the player has a Jack-of-all-Trades in mind, most of his
character's traits will be rated Mediocre to Good.  In FUDGE, a
character with a trait at Fair will succeed at ordinary tasks 72% of
the time - there is usually no need to create a superstar.

The player and GM then meet and discuss the character.  If the GM
feels the character is too potent for the campaign she has in mind,
she'll ask the player either to limit the character's power, or take
some faults that will balance him.  See also Section 2.9, Minimizing
Abuse.

The GM may then need to suggest areas that she sees as being too weak
- perhaps she has a game situation in mind that will test a trait the
player didn't think of.  Gentle hints, such as "Does he have any
social skills?" can help the player through the weak spots.  Of
course, if there are multiple players, other PCs can compensate for an
individual PC's weaknesses.  In this case, the question to the whole
group might then be, "Does *anyone* have any social skills?"

2.6  Objective Character Creation
---------------------------------

For those who don't mind counting numbers a bit, the following method
creates interesting and well-balanced characters.

2.61  Attributes
----------------

The GM should decide how many attributes she deems necessary - or she
might leave it up to each player.  She then allows players a number of
free attribute levels equal to half the number of attributes (round up
for more cinematic games, down for more realistic games).  For
example, if she selects four attributes, each player starts with two
free levels to raise his attributes with.

NOTE: for a more high-powered game, the GM should allow a number of
free levels *equal to* the number of attributes chosen.

All attributes are considered to be Fair until the player raises or
lowers them.  The cost of raising or lowering an attribute is

    -3  Terrible
    -2  Poor
    -1  Mediocre
     0  Fair
    +1  Good
    +2  Great
    +3  Superb

Thus, a player may raise his Strength attribute (which defaults to
Fair) to Good.  This will cost him one free attribute level.  He could
then raise Strength again to Great which would cost another free
level.  This would exhaust his free levels if there were only four
attributes, but he would have one more if there were six attributes,
and eight more free levels if there were 20 attributes.

When the free attribute levels have been exhausted, any further
raising of an attribute must be done by lowering another attribute an
equal amount (see also Section 2.64, Trading Traits).  From the last
example, Strength can be raised one more level, to Superb, if Charm is
lowered to Mediocre to compensate for the raise.

If the GM leaves the number of attributes up to the players, she may
simply tell them to take half as many free levels as attributes they
choose.  But if a player chooses an attribute and leaves it at Fair,
that attribute does *not* count towards the total of attributes which
determines the amount of free levels.  That is, a player cannot simply
add 12 attributes, all at Fair, in order to get 6 more free levels to
raise the others with!  GM-mandated attributes left at Fair *do* count
toward the total of free levels, though.

2.62  Skills
------------

Each player has a number of free skill levels with which to raise his
skills.  Suggested limits are:

For Very Broad Skill Groups: 15 levels.
For Moderately Broad Skill Groups: 30 levels.
For Very Specific Skills: 40 to 60 levels.

Ask the GM for the allotted amount, which will give you a clue as to
how precisely to define your skills.  Of course, the GM may choose any
number that suits her, such as 23, 42, or 74 . . . see Section 6.3,
Character Examples.

All skills have a default value of Poor unless the player raises or
lowers them.  (The GM may make exceptions: very easy skills might be
rated Mediocre unless altered, and very hard ones Terrible.  She'll
tell you when she reviews your character sheet, or she may have a list
of hard and easy skills already made up - ask her.)

Certain skills will start at non-existent.  These might be things like
Languages, Karate, Nuclear Physics, or Knowledge of Aztec Rituals,
which must be studied to be known at all.  In this case, it costs one
level to raise the skill to Terrible.  It would take 4 levels just to
get such a skill to Fair, for example.

For ease in character creation, see the table on the Character Sheet
Example, (Objective Character Creation method) Section 6.2.

The GM may limit the number of Superb and Great skills each character
may have *at character creation*.  For a high-level game, no limit is
necessary.  For a more realistic game, the GM might set a limit of 1
Superb skill and 3 or 4 Great skills, maximum, for example - see
Section 6.3, Character Examples.  These limits can be exceeded through
character development, of course.

Once the free levels are used up, a skill must be dropped one level
(from the starting Poor to Terrible) to raise another skill one level.
(See also Section 2.64, Trading Traits.)  All choices are subject to
GM veto, of course.

It is possible to mix different breadths of skill groupings.  A GM who
has little interest in combat can simply choose Unarmed Combat, Melee
Weapons and Ranged Weapons as the only three combat skills.  But this
does not stop her from using all the individual Social skills (and
many more) listed as examples in Section 2.32, Skills.  If this option
is chosen, the broad groups should cost double the levels of the
narrower groups.

But it is awkward to mix skill group sizes within the same areas.  For
example, it is difficult to have a generic Thief Skills group that can
be raised one level at a time, and also have individual skills of
lockpicking, pick-pocketing, palming, security-device dismantling,
etc.  If she *does* wish to do this - and it's not recommended - then
the broad skill group *in this case* has a maximum limit of Good, and
*triple* cost to raise - or more, if the GM so mandates.

If the GM is using very broad groups, a player may raise a very
specific skill (such as Poker, for example, instead of general
Gambling skill).  The only reason to take a specific skill when the GM
is using broad-based skill groups is to fit a character concept - do
not expect the character to be equally adept with the other skills in
the group.  This would be true for Groo the Wanderer (TM), for
instance, who would simply raise Sword skill, even if the GM is using
the broad term Melee Weapons as a skill group.  Groo would have, in
fact, a Poor rating with all other Melee weapons, and this would
accurately reflect the character.

2.63  Gifts & Faults
--------------------

If the GM has gifts in her game, each player has two free gifts
(suggested).  Any further gifts taken must be balanced by taking on a
fault to balance it, or by trading traits.

2.64  Trading Traits
--------------------

During character creation, free levels may be traded (in either
direction) at the following rate:

1 gift = 2 attribute levels = 6 skill levels.
1 attribute level = 3 skill levels.

So a player, with only three free attribute levels, but 30 free skill
levels, may trade 3 of his skill levels to get another free attribute
level, or 6 skill levels to get another free gift.

A player may also take extra GM-approved faults at the following rate:

1 fault = 2 attribute levels = 6 skill levels.

However, the GM may rule that a particular fault is not serious enough
to be worth 2 attribute levels, but may be worth 1 attribute level or
3 skill levels.  On the other hand, severe faults may be worth more
attribute levels.

2.7  Uncommitted Traits
-----------------------

Whether the character is created subjectively or objectively, each
character has three (or more, if the GM is so inclined) free
uncommitted traits.  This means that at some point in the game, the
player will realize that he forgot something about the character that
should have been mentioned.  He may request to stop the action, and
define a previously undefined trait, subject to the GM's approval.
Only a very lenient GM will allow this to happen during combat time,
though!

Also note that the GM-set skill limits (such as 1 Superb, 3 Greats)
are still in effect: if the character already has the maximum number
of Superb skills allowed, he can't make an uncommitted trait a Superb
skill.

2.8  Random Character Creation
------------------------------

Some players like to roll their attributes randomly.  Here is one
possible method to use in such cases.  Alternate techniques can be
easily designed.

Have the player roll 2d6 for each *attribute*.  The results are:

2 = Terrible
4 = Poor
3,5 = Mediocre
6-8 = Fair
9,11 = Good
10 = Great
12 = Superb

The GM needs to decide if the player still gets the standard number of
free levels or not.  She may also restrict trading levels.

For *skills*, the results are read as:

2-5,12 = Terrible
6-8 = Poor
9-10 = Mediocre
11 = Fair

In this case, the player still gets the standard number of free
levels, or the GM may allow only half the normal levels.

The GM can let the players choose their gifts and faults, or she may
wish to make up separate tables of gifts and faults, and have the
players roll once or twice on each.  For example:

        Gift                       Fault
        ----                       -----
2       Nice Appearance            Poor Appearance
3       Tough Hide                 Weak Eyesight
4       Charismatic                Stinks
5       Keen Hearing               Terrible Liar
6       Detects Lies Easily        Gullible

Etc.  Obviously, conflicting traits should be rerolled.

2.9  Minimizing Abuse
---------------------

Obviously, character creation in FUDGE can be abused.  There are many
ways to avoid this:

A) The GM can require that the character take another fault or two to
balance the power.  ("Okay I'll allow you to have all that . . . but
you need a challenge.  Take on another weakness: maybe some vice
(perhaps a secret one), or be unable to tell a believable lie, or
anything that fits the character concept that I can use to test you
now and then."); or

B) She can simply veto any trait (or raised/lowered combination) she
feels is abusive.  ("I see you raised Battle-Axe in exchange for
lowering Needlepoint.  Hmmm.")  This allows the GM to customize the
power level of a game: for high-powered games, allow most anything;
for less cinematic campaigns, make them trade equally useful trait for
trait; or

C) She can simply note the character weaknesses and introduce a
situation into every adventure where at least one of them is
significant to the mission ("You'll be sent as an emissary to the
Wanduzi tribe - they value fine Needlepoint work above all other
skills, by the way . . ."); or

D) She can use the "disturbance in the force" technique of making sure
that more powerful characters attract more serious problems.  ("The
bruiser enters the bar with a maniacal look in his eye.  He scans the
room for a few seconds, then begins to stare intently at you.")

[End Chapter 2.  FUDGE continued next file ...]
-- 
  - Steffan O'Sullivan		         sos@oz.plymouth.edu

X-NEWS: wharton rec.games.frp.archives: 468
Path: netnews.upenn.edu!dsinc!spool.mu.edu!howland.reston.ans.net!darwin.sura.net!news-feed-1.peachnet.edu!gatech!news.ans.net!rpi!goldm
From: sos@oz.plymouth.edu (Steffan O'Sullivan)
Newsgroups: rec.games.frp.archives
Subject: FUDGE July93: Part 2 of 4
Message-ID: <221fd9$46s@usenet.rpi.edu>
Date: 14 Jul 93 17:22:49 GMT
Sender: goldm@operators.its.rpi.edu
Reply-To: sos@oz.plymouth.edu (Steffan O'Sullivan)
Followup-To: rec.games.frp.misc
Organization: Plymouth State College - Plymouth, N.H.
Lines: 636
Approved: goldm@rpi.edu
NNTP-Posting-Host: operators.its.rpi.edu


          FUDGE: Freeform, Universal, Donated Gaming Engine
                   A Free Role-playing Game (RPG).
                        By Steffan O'Sullivan

Legal Notice
------------

Version: July 4, 1993

FUDGE is copyright 1992, 1993 by Steffan O'Sullivan.  It may be freely
copied and distributed by any means desired.  This legal notice must
be included with each copy of FUDGE.  No charge may be made for FUDGE
beyond a maximum US$6 fee (at 1993 rates) for materials and shipping,
without written permission from the author.

A publisher who wishes to include FUDGE in a book of copyrighted
source material or adventures may do so, so long as (1) the
publisher's copyrighted material is longer than the amount of FUDGE
material included, (2) this legal notice and at least Chapter 1 of
FUDGE are included, (3) the words in this legal notice and those in
Chapter 1 of FUDGE are not changed in any way, and (4) there is no
extra charge for including FUDGE in the book.

FUDGE was first published in 1992 on internet, and was written by
Steffan O'Sullivan (sos@oz.plymouth.edu) with an extensive amount of
high-quality input from Andy Skinner.  Other valued contributors
include Martin Bergendahl, Thomas Brettinger, Robert Bridson, Travis
Casey, Paul Jason Clegg, Peter F. Delaney, Jay Doane, Brian Edmonds,
Shawn Garbett, Ed Heil, Bernard Hsiung, John H. Kim, Christian
Otkjaer, Bill Seurer, Larry Smith, Stephan Szabo, and others on
rec.games.design on internet.

Groo the Wanderer (TM) is a trademark of Sergio Aragones, and use of
the name does not challenge the trademark status in any way.


[Continued from previous file:]

Table of Contents (This File)
=============================

3  Supernormal Powers
    3.1  Supernormal Power Terms
    3.2  At Character Creation
          3.21  Powers Available
          3.22  Associated Skills
          3.23  Combat Powers
    3.3  Non-humans
          3.31  Strength and Mass
          3.32  Scale Correlations
          3.33  Cost of Scale
          3.34  Racial Bonuses and Penalties
    3.4  Legendary Heroes
    3.5  Magic
    3.6  Miracles
    3.7  Psi
    3.8  Superpowers
    3.9  Cybernetic Enhancements

3  Supernormal Powers
=====================

If your game doesn't have any supernormal powers, you don't need to
read Chapter 3 at all.  This includes such genres as modern espionage,
WWII French resistance, gunslingers of the Old West, swashbuckling
Musketeers or pirates, and any historical gaming in general.  Please
feel free to skip ahead directly to Chapter 4, Action Resolution.

On the other hand, those who play in games with non-human races,
magic, psi, superpowers, etc., will need to read this chapter before
character creation is complete.

3.1  Supernormal Power Terms
----------------------------

Supernormal power: any ability that is beyond the capability of human
     beings as we know them.  They are basically very powerful gifts.
     Some may have associated skills (which are taken separately,
     using the normal skill rules).  Often abbreviated to Power.

Superfault: any fault that goes beyond the human norm.  These are
     often associated with supernormal powers to help balance the cost
     (such as limiting a Power to certain situations) or can be
     associated with fantasy or alien races.  In the Objective
     Character Creation system, the GM sets the value of each
     superfault - it may be the same as an ordinary fault or worth
     more.

Power: a supernormal power.

Mana: an invisible substance that can be detected (or even created)
     and manipulated by magicians to alter matter, time and space.

Magic: the art of influencing events through manipulation of mana, or
     through compelling supernormal beings from another dimension, or
     channeling power from some other source.  Magic may be studied by
     humans, but it is inherent in some races, such as the Fay.

Miracle: magic performed by a deity.  Holy persons can attempt to work
     miracles by invoking their deity.

Psi: any power that involves mind over matter, time or space.

Superpower: any supernormal power that is an inherent ability, whether
     because of mutation, exposure to radiation, a gift of space
     aliens, etc., or granted by a device, such as an alien-science
     belt.  Examples of superpowers can be found in any comic book
     store, and include super strength, the ability to fly, see
     through walls, cling to ceilings, become invisible, etc.

Cybernetic Enhancement: any mechanical or electronic enhancement to a
     normal body that gives the character supernormal powers.

Non-human Races: certain fantasy and science fiction races have
     abilities beyond the human norm, such as being much stronger, or
     able to fly, etc.  Most of these abilities could also be
     classified as Psi or Superpowers, so they are not treated
     separately, except for Mass and Strength.  Note that androids and
     robots are considered races for rules purposes.

Scale: in the discussion of non-humans, a race's Strength is rated in
     *Scale*.  Human Scale equals 0.  A race of greater than human
     average strength would be Scale 1 or more, while a race of lesser
     average strength than humans would be Scale -1 or less.
     Individual creatures can then be of Fair strength, or Good
     strength, etc., relative to their own species.

3.2  At Character Creation
--------------------------

Supernormal powers may or may not be available in a given game.  They
are not appropriate to all genres.

The best way to design a supernormal character is through close
discussion with the GM.  A player should describe what he wants the
character to be able to do, and the GM will decide if that's within
the limits she has in mind for the game.  If not, she'll make
suggestions about how to change the character to fit her campaign.

Supernormal powers are treated as very powerful gifts, with
availability set by the GM.  The GM may decide that each player can
take 2 Powers, for example, or 5, or more.  The player may make a case
for further Powers, but may need to take superfaults to balance them.

Some Powers might be so effective that they are worth more than other
Powers.  In the Objective Character Creation system, the GM may set
the cost of a certain supernormal power equal to two or three
"average" supernormal powers.  In some cases, the GM will probably
veto player suggestions outright: Omniscience is a good example!

The GM may decide that supernormal powers may be pooled with other
traits for trading purposes.  In this case, 1 (average) Power is worth
2 gifts.  This is most likely done by a player who wishes to play a
magician in a fantasy setting.  He will need to trade some skill,
attribute, or gift levels to buy magical Powers.

Undefined Powers are non-existent - that is, they do not have a
default value of Fair, like attributes, or Poor, like skills.  If a
supernormal power is not defined for a character, he can't do it.

3.21  Powers Available
----------------------

The GM needs to design the type, number allowed, and drawbacks of
Powers in her game.  Some examples:

Types of Powers: the GM may allow only magic, or only psi, or only
superpowers, etc., or some combinations of the above.  In addition,
she needs to decide how finely a supernormal power is subdivided: is
ESP a generic Power, or is it split into separate Powers such as
Precognition and Clairvoyance, for example.  Is magic subdivided into
spells, or groups of spells (such as elemental magic) or simply the
ability to break the laws of nature in any way that can be imagined,
and so on.

Number of Powers allowed:  the GM may allow only one Power per
character, or 20 Powers (or even more if they are individual spells),
or anything in between.

Drawbacks of Powers:  Using a Power might have no inconvenience, or it
might be physically or mentally taxing, or time consuming, or
unreliable, or uncontrollable, or have side effects, or only work in
certain conditions or with certain materials, or be risky to the
character, or be limited to a certain number of uses per day, or
affect the mental stability of the character, etc.

3.22  Associated Skills
-----------------------

If a Power logically requires a skill to use it efficiently, the skill
must be bought separately.  For example, the superpower Flight allows
a character to fly, and usually no skill roll is needed.  But the
ability to make intricate maneuvers in close combat without slamming
into a wall requires a roll against a Flying skill.  (The GM may
ignore this and simply say that the Power Flight means never needing
to make a roll for any flying maneuver.)

Another common skill is Throwing: hurling balls of fire or bolts of
energy at a foe.  Or the GM might rule that being able to aim it comes
with the power for free: no roll needed, it automatically hits the
target every time unless they make a Good degree task Dodge.

This can be especially true with magic: the ability to cast spells at
all may be a gift, but to do it right is a skill, or even many
different skills.

3.23  Combat Powers
-------------------

If a supernormal power can be used to attack a foe, the GM must
determine (preferably during character creation) the strength of the
Power for damage purposes.  An offensive Power is usually handled as a
propelled weapon, such as a gun, or as being equivalent to a certain
melee weapon.  This can just be expressed in terms of damage, though,
such as Ball of Fire, +6 damage, or large Claws, +3 damage.

In the case of a magical attack, the more potent the attack, the
greater the penalty to the character to use it.  This can be a penalty
to the skill level, greater fatigue, and/or some other disadvantage.

3.3  Non-humans
---------------

Some campaigns will have characters (or animals, etc.) with traits
beyond the human norm.  In particular, characters with Strength well
above or below the human range are very common.  Examples include
giants, superheroes, pixies, aliens, ogres, intelligent rabbits, etc.

In FUDGE, Strength and Mass are rated by the GM in terms of *Scale*
for different races.  Most other traits that may be different for non-
humans are handled with a *Racial Bonus or Penalty* rather than being
on a different Scale - see Section 3.34.

Humans are of Scale 0, unless some other race is the game-world norm.
(E.g., if all the PCs are playing pixies or giants.  In these cases,
the PCs' race is Scale 0, and humans would be a different Scale.)
Non-human races can have a positive or negative number for Scale,
depending on whether they are stronger or weaker than humans.

3.31  Strength and Mass
-----------------------

Each level of Strength is defined to be 1.5 times stronger than the
previous level.  So a character with Good Strength is 1.5 times as
strong as a character with Fair Strength.

[Note that this progression is not necessarily true for any other
attribute.  There is a wider range of strength in humans than
dexterity, for example.  In that case, Superb Dexterity is only about
twice as good as Fair Dexterity.]

Scale increases in the same way: a Scale 1, Fair Strength individual
is 1.5 times stronger than a Scale 0, Fair Strength individual.  This
holds for each increase in Scale: a Scale 10 Superb Strength creature
is 1.5 times stronger than a Scale 9 Superb Strength creature, for
example.

At this point, it is tempting to say that a Scale 1 Fair Strength is
equal to a Scale 0 Good Strength.  This is true for Strength, but not
for Mass.

Scale really measures Mass, or Density, and Strength just goes along
for the ride.  In this case, Mass has a specific meaning: how wounds
affect you.  It may or may not coincide with the scientific definition
of Mass.

It takes more human-powered hits to weaken a giant than a human, for
example.  She may not really be a healthy giant, but her sheer bulk
means that human-sized sword strokes don't do as much relative damage
to her as they would to a human - unless they hit a vital spot, of
course.

Likewise, a pixie can be healthy and robust, but not survive a single
kick from a human.  The difference is Mass, and the strength related
to it.

A Scale 1 Fair Strength fighter has an advantage over a Scale 0 Good
Strength fighter, even though their Strengths are equal.  The Scale 1
fighter is less affected by the other's damage due to his mass.
Therefore, do not blithely equate Scale 0 Good with Scale 1 Fair.  In
particular, do not let your PC human Superb Strength fighters claim
they are Scale 3 Fair Strength - they will be able to shrug off sword
blows if you do!  This is explained in Section 4.64, Non-human Scale
in Combat.

Of course, the GM may envision a less massive but harder to kill race
than humans.  However, such a case is not likely to be grossly
different.  It is best handled by a Racial Bonus (Section 3.34),
either as some sort of Toughness Gift (Tough Hide, or Density - either
one would subtract from damage), or by a bonus to Damage Capacity.

If the GM doesn't want to link non-human Strength and Mass - say she
has Pixies of Strength Scale -6 and Mass Scale -4 - then combat
between two Pixies would not work the same as combat between two
humans.  In this case, they will have a harder time hurting each other
than humans would.  This may actually be what she wants: a super-
strong superhero who can dish out punishment but can't take it can be
represented by Strength Scale 10, Mass Scale 2, for example.

Strength can vary within each race just as it can for humans.  You can
have Scale 10 Superb Strength Giants and Scale 10 Terrible Strength
Giants.  Unlike Strength, though, it is not recommend that Mass vary
much within a race.  If you do allow Mass to vary for an individual,
it should never be worse than Mediocre or better than Good.  In fact,
it is far better to call Good Mass a Gift, and Mediocre Mass a fault
than treat it as an attribute.

See also Section 4.64, Non-human Scale in Combat.

3.32  Scale Correlations
------------------------

The GM should refer to the following table when assigning a Scale to a
race.  This only has to be done *once*, at race creation.

First, she should decide how much stronger (or weaker) the average
member of race X is compared to the average human.  For example, she
might decide that Ogres are 3 times stronger than humans, and pixies
are 8 times weaker (which equals 0.12 times as strong).  She then
needs to look up the closest numbers to these strength modifiers on
the table below, and read across to find the correct racial scale for
Ogres and Pixies in her world:

Strength Modifier:       Scale:     Strength Modifier:       Scale:
     0.01                 -11               7.5                5
     0.02                 -10              10                  6
     0.03                  -9              15                  7
     0.04                  -8              25                  8
     0.06                  -7              40                  9
     0.1  (Pixie Fair)     -6              60                 10
     0.15                  -5              90                 11
     0.2                   -4             130                 12
     0.3                   -3             200                 13
     0.5                   -2             300                 14
     0.7                   -1             450                 15
     1    Human Fair        0             650                 16
     1.5                    1            1000                 17
     2.3                    2            1500                 18
     3.5  (Ogre Fair)       3            2500                 19
     5                      4            4000                 20

In these particular examples, Ogres are Scale 3 creatures, while
Pixies are Scale -6.  (You may envision Ogres and Pixies differently,
of course.)  The Scale number is figured in to damage in combat, and
all weapons and armor are assumed to be of the same Scale as the
wielder.

[Note that these numbers have been rounded to the nearest useful
number.  They are only roughly 1.5 times the previous number, but
close enough for game purposes.]

Other examples: a GM reads in a Medieval text that a dragon is "as
strong as 20 warriors."  Looking at the table, 20 times the human norm
is Scale 8.  However, since the average *warrior* is probably of Good
strength, she chooses Scale 9 for the average dragon in her world.  Of
course, an individual dragon can still have Poor Strength compared to
other dragons.  This is simply listed as Strength Poor (-2), Scale 9.

This same GM wants PC leprechauns to be available.  While they are
very small, she decides their magic makes them a bit stronger than
their size would otherwise indicate: Scale -4.  So a Good Strength
leprechaun is as strong as a Terrible Strength human in her world.

The GM can also use this table to determine relative lifting strength
or carrying capacity of characters or beasts if she wishes.

The GM may require a Strength roll to lift a given object.  This will
depend on the Scale of the character, of course.  Thus, a leprechaun
might need a Good Strength degree task to lift a rock that a human
could lift without even a roll.

3.33  Cost of Scale
-------------------

If you are using the Objective Character Creation system, each step of
increased Scale should cost one attribute level *and* one gift.  This
is because each level of Scale includes +1 Strength and extra Mass
which is the equivalent of the Tough Hide gift.  However, a generous
GM may charge less.

In a superhero game, this gets very expensive very quickly.  An
alternative method that allows more powerful characters is to charge
one supernormal power to get Super Strength equal to a certain Scale.
This can be anywhere from Scale 4 (5 times as strong as the average
human) to Scale 13 (200 times as strong as the average human) or even
higher, depending on the power level of the campaign.  A character
then raises or lowers his Strength attribute separately to show how he
is compared to the average super-strong superhero.

Example: the GM states that one supernormal power buys Scale 10
Strength (50 times the human norm).  Any character taking that
supernormal power has Scale 10 Fair Strength automatically.  He can
then raise his Strength to Scale 10 Good at the cost of one attribute
level, and so on.

The GM may also allow separating Mass and Strength for superheroes.
For example, the superhero mentioned in Section 3.31 with Strength
Scale 10 and Mass Scale 2 would only have to pay for 2 gifts and 10
attribute levels.  Or, with a generous GM, a single supernormal power
might cover the cost of the whole package.

Some other supernormal powers have levels, such as Telekinesis
(increased power allows greater weight to be lifted), Telepathy
(increased power means greater range) Wind Control (increased power
allows such things as a jet of wind, whirlwind, or tornado), etc.

In these cases, each level can be bought as a separate supernormal
power, which is very expensive.  Or you could use the option given
above for Scale: one supernormal power buys the supernormal ability at
a middling power range, and a simple attribute (or even skill) level
raises or lowers it from there.

For Scales below the human norm, each step of Scale includes a fault
equivalent to Easily Wounded, and the GM may allow this to be used to
balance other traits like any other fault - see Section 2.64, Trading
Traits.

3.34  Racial Bonuses and Penalties
----------------------------------

For most traits other than Strength, there is no need to use Scale.
It's easy to imagine someone wanting to play a race that is slightly
more intelligent than humans, but a race ten times smarter than the
smartest human is so alien that it would be impossible to play.  This
is also true for most traits - we just can't grasp such extreme
differences from our worldview.

So instead of Scale for non-Strength traits, the GM should use Racial
Bonuses or Penalties.  For example, if the GM envisions halflings as
being particularly hardy, she can give them a +1 bonus to
Constitution.  This simply means that halfling Fair Constitution
equals human Good Constitution.  As another example, an alien race
called Cludds might have a racial penalty of -1 or -2 to Intelligence.

For everything except Strength, it is best to use adjectives relative
to humans on the character sheets, though you should put the racial-
relative term in brackets.  (Such as: Grahkesh, Intelligence Poor
[Cludd Fair].)  However, *always* list Strength relative to the
character's own race, with the Scale (if other than 0), so the Mass
will be accurate.  See the sample character, Brogo the Halfling
(Section 6.31), for an example of both racial bonus and different
Scale.

Racial bonuses and penalties can be used for any type of trait:
attributes, skills, gifts, supernormal powers, or faults.

If using the Objective Character Creation system, each level of a
Racial Bonus or Penalty is usually equal to one level of the specific
trait raised or lowered normally.  That is, if you are granting a +1
to Agility or +1 to Perception for a race, it should cost 1 attribute
level.  If a race has a gift of Perfect Sense of Direction, it should
cost 1 gift.  The innate ability to fly or cast magic spells should
cost one supernormal power, etc.

If a race is at -1 to all Social skills, however, this should only be
worth -1 skill level if you have a single skill called Social Skills.
If you have a few social individual social skills, it should be worth
one fault, at least.  If you have many social skills affected by such
a Racial Penalty, it is probably worth a superfault.  The converse is
true for Bonuses that affect many skills: it should cost a supernormal
power.

3.4  Legendary Heroes
---------------------

Some genres allow human characters to develop beyond the realm of the
humanly possible.  Such campaigns eventually involve planes of
existence beyond the mundane as the PCs require greater and greater
challenges.

This style of gaming can be represented in FUDGE by Legendary Levels.
Section 2.2, Levels, introduced the concept of Legendary traits as a
goal for PCs to work toward.  This section expands that concept
infinitely, beyond realism.

If the GM and players prefer this type of gaming, *any* skill can be
raised beyond Legendary.  Instead of renaming each level, simply use a
numbering system: Legendary 2nd Level Swordsman, Legendary 3rd Level
Archer, etc.  Attributes can be raised, also, but (except for
Strength) this is much rarer.

Each level of Legendary gives a +1 bonus to any action resolution.

The Objective Character Development system, Section 5.2, lists
suggested experience point costs for attaining these levels.

Please remember that these levels do not automatically exist in any
given game: these are strictly optional levels for a very specific,
non-realistic genre.  If the GM says they don't exist, don't pester
her!

3.5  Magic
----------

Magic should only be allowed in games where it is appropriate, of
course.

It may be easiest for the GM simply to translate whatever magic system
she is familiar with into FUDGE.  If the GM isn't translating another
game system's magic rules to FUDGE, she should consider what being a
magician means to her.

What is the source of magic?  Is it a natural process, but hidden to
most, such as mana manipulation?  If it does use mana, is the mana
created by the mage, or is inherent in a locale?  Or is it summoning
otherworld entities to do your bidding?  Or finding a source of Power
and channeling it to your ends?  Or something altogether different
from these suggestions?

Each of these options then requires further self-examination: can
anyone learn to work magic, or is it an inherent talent (that is, does
it require the character to have a supernormal power)?  If the latter,
are there levels of the Power available, and what would having more
levels mean?  Is a skill also required?  Of course, even if a magician
must have a Power to cast spells, there may also be magic items that
anyone can use - these are very common in tales and legends.

If beings are summoned, are they evil, good, neutral?  How do they
feel about being commanded to work for the magician?  Can they
adversely affect the magician if he fails a spell roll?

If Power is being channeled from an external source, is that source in
the physical plane or astral?  Is it from a living being, or contained
in an inanimate object as inert energy, like a piece of coal before
going into a fire?

What is the process of using magic?  Does it involve memorized spells?
Physical components?  Meditation?  Complex and time-consuming ritual?
How long does it take to cast a spell?  Can a spell be read out of a
book?  Improvised on the spot?

How reliable is magic?  Are there any drawbacks?  Any societal
attitudes toward magicians?

Once these issues have been resolved, and the degree of magic in the
game decided on, the magic system can be created using FUDGE
mechanics.  A sample magic system, FUDGE Magic, is available in the
Addenda.

3.6  Miracles
-------------

All miracles are powered by a deity.  Some miracles may happen at the
deity's instigation (GM whim, in this case), and some may be
petitioned by characters.

["Deity" is here used in a pagan sense: any being greater than human,
that can live in another plane beyond the material.  To many
religions, of course, there is only one Deity, and to speak in the
plural is blasphemous.  In these cases, the term should be in the
singular, or it should be changed to a neutral term that refers to
beings between human and Divine power, such as angels, demons, djinni,
efriti, etc.]

The GM must decide whether miracles can occur in her world, and
whether they can be called by character petition.  If the latter, then
she has to make many other decisions: can *any* character petition a
particular deity?  Does it matter if the character is actually a
member of a religious order?  How important is the character's
behavior: would a deity help a member of a particular religious order
even if he had been acting against the deity's goals?  How certain is
the miracle to occur?  How soon will it become manifest?  How broad
and how specific can requests be?

The answers will vary from GM to GM - no generic system of miracles is
possible.  A sample miracle system, FUDGE Miracles, is included in the
Addenda.

3.7  Psi
--------

Again, it is probably easiest for the GM to translate whatever
psionics rules she knows to FUDGE.

As a *very* simple system, each psionic ability is a separate
supernormal power.  The ability to read minds, or foresee the future,
or telekinetically move an object, etc., each cost one supernormal
power (2 gifts).

Just *how* powerful the psionic ability is depends on the level of psi
the GM wants for the game world.  Someone who can telekinetically lift
a battleship is obviously more powerful than someone who can't lift
anything heavier than a roulette ball - though the latter may make
more money with his power, if he's highly skilled!

If the game world has more than one level of power available, then a
character must spend multiple free power levels to get the higher
levels.  See also Cost of Scale, Section 3.33.

The GM should also require skills to use these powers.  Having the
psionic ability to use telekinesis just allows you to pick an object
up with your mental powers, and move it crudely about.  To do fine
manipulation, such as pick a pocket, requires a successful degree task
against a telekinetic skill.

A sample psi system, FUDGE Psi, is included in the Addenda.

3.8  Superpowers
----------------

If the campaign has superpowers as in "comic" books, then there will
probably be a wide variety of powers available.  How many an
individual character can have depends on the power level of the
campaign.  A common treatment of superheroes is the concept of
superfaults, which might make more powers available to the players.
For example, a character might be able to fly, but only while singing.

There are far too many powers to list in FUDGE - browsing through a
comic store's wares will give you a good idea of what's available.  As
with psionics, each power costs one of the free supernormal powers
available, and some can be taken in different levels.  Very potent
ones might cost two or more of the "average" superpowers.

Note that super strength is treated as a separate scale - see Section
3.3, Non-humans.  Other superpowers that come in levels are discussed
in Section 3.33, Cost of Scale.

3.9  Cybernetics
----------------

Artificial limbs, organs, implants and connections to computers are
common in some SF settings.  If these grant powers beyond the human
norm, they must be bought with supernormal power levels if using the
Objective Character Creation system, or with the GM's approval in any
case.

If an implant grants a bonus to an attribute, it should cost as much
as the attribute bonus, which is not necessarily as much as a
supernormal power.  Since an artificial implant may occasionally fail,
however, the GM can give a slight cost break by also allowing a free
skill level elsewhere on the character sheet.

[End of Chapter 3.  FUDGE continued next file ...]
-- 
  - Steffan O'Sullivan		         sos@oz.plymouth.edu

X-NEWS: wharton rec.games.frp.archives: 469
Path: netnews.upenn.edu!dsinc!spool.mu.edu!howland.reston.ans.net!gatech!news.ans.net!rpi!goldm
From: sos@oz.plymouth.edu (Steffan O'Sullivan)
Newsgroups: rec.games.frp.archives
Subject: FUDGE July93: Part 3 of 4
Message-ID: <221fdl$46t@usenet.rpi.edu>
Date: 14 Jul 93 17:23:01 GMT
Sender: goldm@operators.its.rpi.edu
Reply-To: sos@oz.plymouth.edu (Steffan O'Sullivan)
Followup-To: rec.games.frp.misc
Organization: Plymouth State College - Plymouth, N.H.
Lines: 1031
Approved: goldm@rpi.edu
NNTP-Posting-Host: operators.its.rpi.edu


          FUDGE: Freeform, Universal, Donated Gaming Engine
                   A Free Role-playing Game (RPG).
                        By Steffan O'Sullivan

Legal Notice
------------

Version: July 4, 1993

FUDGE is copyright 1992, 1993 by Steffan O'Sullivan.  It may be freely
copied and distributed by any means desired.  This legal notice must
be included with each copy of FUDGE.  No charge may be made for FUDGE
beyond a maximum US$6 fee (at 1993 rates) for materials and shipping,
without written permission from the author.

A publisher who wishes to include FUDGE in a book of copyrighted
source material or adventures may do so, so long as (1) the
publisher's copyrighted material is longer than the amount of FUDGE
material included, (2) this legal notice and at least Chapter 1 of
FUDGE are included, (3) the words in this legal notice and those in
Chapter 1 of FUDGE are not changed in any way, and (4) there is no
extra charge for including FUDGE in the book.

FUDGE was first published in 1992 on internet, and was written by
Steffan O'Sullivan (sos@oz.plymouth.edu) with an extensive amount of
high-quality input from Andy Skinner.  Other valued contributors
include Martin Bergendahl, Thomas Brettinger, Robert Bridson, Travis
Casey, Paul Jason Clegg, Peter F. Delaney, Jay Doane, Brian Edmonds,
Shawn Garbett, Ed Heil, Bernard Hsiung, John H. Kim, Christian
Otkjaer, Bill Seurer, Larry Smith, Stephan Szabo, and others on
rec.games.design on internet.

Groo the Wanderer (TM) is a trademark of Sergio Aragones, and use of
the name does not challenge the trademark status in any way.


[Continued from previous file:]

Table of Contents (This File)
=============================

4  Action Resolution
    4.1  Action Resolution Terms
    4.2  Rolling the Dice
          4.21  Using a Table
          4.22  Tableless Dice Method
          4.23  Success Rates
    4.3  Action Modifiers
    4.4  Unopposed Actions
    4.5  Opposed Actions
    4.6  Combat
          4.61  Melee Combat
          4.62  Multiple Combatants in Melee
          4.63  Ranged Combat
          4.64  Non-human Scale in Combat
    4.7  Damage and Healing
          4.71  Subjective Damage System
          4.72  Objective Damage System
          4.73  Knockout Damage
          4.74  Healing
    4.8  Critical Results
    4.9  NPC Reactions

4  Action Resolution
====================

4.1  Action Resolution Terms
----------------------------

Dice: Each player and the GM need two six-sided dice.  (A system using
     2d10 is included in the Addenda.)

Unopposed Action: some actions are *Unopposed*.  This means the
     character is trying to perform an action which isn't influenced
     by anyone else.  Examples include jumping a wide chasm, climbing
     a cliff, performing a chemistry experiment, etc.  The player
     simply rolls the dice and reads the result.

Degree Task: the GM will set a degree task when you try an Unopposed
     Action.  Usually it will be Fair, but sometimes tasks are easier
     or harder.  Example: to climb an average cliff, with lots of
     handholds, is a Fair degree task, but the GM may set it at Great
     for a very hard cliff.  This means the player must make a rolled
     degree of Great or higher to climb the cliff successfully.

Rolled Degree: this refers to how well you did at a particular task.
     If you are Good at Climbing in general, but rolled a Great result
     on a particular attempt, then the rolled degree is Great.

Opposed Action: some actions are *Opposed*.  This means other people
     (or animals, etc.) may have an effect on the outcome of the
     action.  In this case, each contestant rolls a pair of dice, and
     the results are compared to determine the outcome.  Examples
     include combat, seduction attempts, haggling, tug-of-war, etc.

Relative Degree: this refers to how well you did compared to another
     participant in an Opposed Action.  Unlike a rolled degree,
     relative degree is expressed as a *number of levels*.  For
     example, if you get a rolled degree result of Good in a fight,
     and your foe gets a rolled degree result of Mediocre, you beat
     her by 2 levels - the relative degree is +2 from your
     perspective, -2 from hers.

Trans-Superb: this is a level of rolled degree that is beyond Superb.
     Rolled degrees from Superb+1 to Superb+4 are possible.  These
     levels, the "trans-superb" levels, are only reachable on rare
     occasions by human beings.  No trait may be taken at (or raised
     to) a trans-superb level (unless the GM is allowing a PC to be at
     Legendary, which is the same as Superb+1.  See Section 5.2,
     Objective Character Development).  For example, the American
     baseball player Willie Mays was a Superb outfielder.  His most
     famous catch, often shown on television, is a Superb+4 rolled
     degree.  It isn't possible for a human to have that level of
     excellence as a routine skill level, however: even Willie was
     "just" a Superb outfielder, who could sometimes do even better.
     A GM may set a degree task in the trans-superb range, but it is
     for nearly impossible actions.

Sub-Terrible: likewise, there are rolled degrees from Terrible-1 down
     to Terrible-4.  No degree task should be set this low, however:
     anything requiring a Terrible degree task or worse should be
     automatic - no roll needed!

4.2  Rolling the Dice
---------------------

When a character performs an action that is so easy as to be
automatic, no dice roll is needed.  Likewise, an action so difficult
that it has no chance to succeed requires no roll, either.  It is for
the middle ground that rolls are needed.

The GM determines which trait is needed for a particular action the PC
wishes to perform.  If it is an Unopposed action the GM also
determines the degree task, usually Fair.

4.21  Using a Table
-------------------

When a character needs to resolve such an action, the player rolls two
dice, adds the numbers, and consults the following table:

Rolled:  |  2  |  3  |  4  |  5  | 6, 7, 8 |  9  | 10  | 11  | 12
---------|-----|-----|-----|-----|---------|-----|-----|-----|---
Levels:  | -4  | -3  | -2  | -1  |   +0    | +1  | +2  | +3  | +4

Read the number rolled across the top of the table, then look below to
the "Levels" line.  The number refers to how many levels above or
below the character's trait level the result is.

The trait levels again are:

    -3  Terrible
    -2  Poor
    -1  Mediocre
     0  Fair
    +1  Good
    +2  Great
    +3  Superb

The numbers are optional, and may be used for those who can add
numbers more easily than adjust words.  For example, if your skill is
Good and you roll a -3 result on a particular action, it might be
easier to envision (1-3 = -2) than (Good -3 = Poor).

Example:  Nathaniel, who has a Good Bow Skill, is shooting in an
archery contest.  He rolls two dice, and consults the table.  If he
rolls a 7 (+0 levels), he gets a result equal to his skill: Good, in
this case.  If he rolls a 9 (+1 level), however, he gets a Great
result, since Great is one level higher than his Good Archery skill.
If he rolls a 3 (-3 levels), unlucky Nathaniel has just made a Poor
shot.

This table should be on each character sheet - see Section 6.2 for an
example.

4.22  Tableless Dice Method
---------------------------

This method does not require a table on the character sheet to read a
die result.  It is also very quick once learned, and does not intrude
into roleplaying.  The disadvantage is that die roll modifiers can not
be used - you must modify the trait.

Each player and the GM need 2d6, and each person should preferably
have two different colors or sizes.  One die must be labelled the
"good" or "positive" die, and the other the "bad" or "negative" die.
(If you only have two identical dice, such as borrowed from a board
game, place your pencil on the table pointing away from you.  Assign
one side of the pencil to be good, the other bad, and roll one die on
each side of the pencil.)

When a die roll is called for, the player rolls both dice and examines
them.  If they are doubles, he has scored his trait level exactly -
leave both dice on the table.  If at least one of them shows a six, he
has also scored his trait level exactly - leave both dice on the
table.

However, if neither of those cases are true, the player should
physically remove the higher die from the table, leaving only the
lesser number rolled.  That number on that die, either good or bad, is
the result.  If the die left on the table is the good die showing a 3,
for example, the player rolled +3 above his trait level.  If it is the
bad die showing a 1, however, he just rolled a -1 to his trait level.

A player should leave the correct number and color of dice on the
table, so the GM can see the general result, even from relatively far
away.  This is an excellent method for use at conventions: the GM
should bring enough dice of two distinct colors (say red and white) so
that each player has one of each.  If all use the same color to be the
good die, the game runs very smoothly.

4.23  Success Rates
-------------------

The odds of scoring a particular result on an unmodified roll are
identical in either 2d6 method.  The following table is provided so
that players can better evaluate their chances of success.

Chance of achieving your trait level or better: 72.2%.
Chance of achieving your trait level exactly: 44.4%.
Chance of getting above or below your trait level: 27.8% each.

Specifically:
Chance of getting trait level +/-1: 11.1% each.
Chance of getting trait level +/-2: 8.3% each.
Chance of getting trait level +/-3: 5.6% each.
Chance of getting trait level +/-4: 2.8% each.

4.3  Action Modifiers
---------------------

There may be modifiers for any given action.  Some GMs prefer to
modify the trait, as it is a very intuitive approach, and works
equally well with both dice methods.  Other GMs prefer to use the dice
table above and modify the die roll instead of the trait.  This allows
a wider range of modifiers to be applied.

The choice is yours.  FUDGE is written with *trait* modification, but
you can choose to modify the die roll without any major problems.
However, if the GM chooses to modify the die rolls, then everyone
should use the dice table method.  If the GM modifies the trait, then
an individual player can use either method.

A modifier of -1 means the trait is reduced by one for the matter at
hand - this is not a permanent reduction, though.  Likewise, modifiers
can temporarily improve a character's traits.  Examples: Joe, Good
with a sword, is Hurt (-1 to all actions).  He is only Fair with his
sword - in fact, he's at -1 to all relevant traits - until he's
healed.  Jill has Mediocre Lockpicking skills, but an exceptionally
fine set of lockpicks gives her a Fair Lockpicking skill while she's
using them.

If a character has a secondary trait that could contribute
significantly to a task, the GM may allow a +1 bonus.  (Example: Vern
is at the library, trying to find out information on an obscure South
American Indian ritual.  He using his Research skill of Good, but he
also has a Good Anthropology skill. The GM decides this is significant
enough to give Vern a Great Research skill for this occasion.  If his
Anthropology skill were Superb, the GM would simply let Vern use that
instead of Research: you don't get to be Superb in Anthropology
without having done a lot of research in it!)

Other conditions may grant a +/-1 to any trait.  +/-2 is an extremely
large modifier in FUDGE, and +/-3 is the maximum that should ever be
granted under extreme conditions.

[If you modify the die roll, +/-2 is of medium potency, while +/-4 is
quite hefty.  +/-5 is the most that should ever be granted under
extreme conditions.]

4.4  Unopposed Actions
----------------------

For each Unopposed action, the GM sets a degree task and announces
which trait should be rolled against.  Fair is the most common degree
task.  If no Skill seems relevant, choose the most appropriate
Attribute.  The player rolls against his level, and tries to match or
surpass the degree task.  In cases where there are levels of success,
the better the roll, the better the character did; the worse the roll,
the worse the character did.

In setting the degree of a task, the GM should remember that the
default for most skills is Poor, not Fair.  Thus the average *trained*
climber can climb a Fair cliff most of the time, but the average
*untrained* climber will usually get a Poor result.  In the example in
Section 4.2 (Nathaniel shooting at an archery target), if the target
is large and close, even a Mediocre archer could be expected to hit
it: degree task Mediocre.  If it were *much* smaller and farther away,
perhaps only a Great archer could expect to hit it regularly: degree
task Great.  And so on.

Example of setting degree task: the party consists of two PCs (Mickey
and Arnold) and an NPC guide (Parri).  They come to a cliff the guide
tells them they have to climb.  The GM announces this is a difficult,
but not impossible, cliff: degree task Good is required to scale it
with no delays or complications.  Checking the character sheets, they
find that Parri's Climbing skill is Great and Mickey's is Good.
Arnold's character sheet doesn't list Climbing, so his skill level is
at default: Poor.  Parri and Mickey decide to climb it, then lower a
rope for Arnold.  Parri rolls a +1 result, which means a rolled degree
of Superb, so she gets up the cliff without any problems, and much
quicker than expected.  Mickey rolls a -1, however, which means a
rolled degree of Fair.  Since this is one degree lower than the degree
task, he's having difficulties.  Had it been severely below the degree
task, Mickey would have fallen.  Since it's only slightly below the
degree task, though, the GM simply rules he is stuck half way up, and
can't figure out how to go on.  Parri ties a rope to a tree at the top
of the cliff, and lowers it for Mickey.  The GM says it is now only a
Poor degree task to climb the cliff with the rope in place, and Mickey
makes this easily on another roll.

Arnold would also need a Poor rolled degree to climb the cliff, but
since his skill is Poor, they decide not to risk it.  Mickey and Parri
have Arnold loop the rope under his shoulders, and pull him up as he
grabs handholds along the way in case they slip.  No roll is needed in
this case, unless they are suddenly attacked when Arnold is only half
way up the cliff . . .

Occasionally, the GM will roll in secret for the PC.  There are times
when the result of even a failed roll would give the player knowledge
he wouldn't otherwise have.  These are usually information rolls.  For
example, if the GM asks the player to make a Perception roll, and the
player fails, the character doesn't notice anything out of the
ordinary.  But the player now knows that there *is* something out of
the ordinary that his character didn't notice . . .  Far better for
the GM to make the roll in secret, and only mention it on a successful
result.

4.5  Opposed Actions
--------------------

When an Opposed action is resolved, each side rolls two dice against
the appropriate trait, and announces the result.  The traits rolled
against are not necessarily the same: for example, a seduction attempt
would be rolled against a Seduction skill for the active participant
(or possibly Appearance attribute) and against Will for the resisting
participant.  There may be modifiers: someone with a vow of chastity
might get a bonus of +2 to his Will, while someone with a Lecherous
fault would have a penalty - or not even try to resist!

The rolled degrees are compared, and a relative degree is determined.
For example, if Lisa is trying to flimflam Joe into thinking she's
from the FBI, and rolls a Great result, this doesn't automatically
mean she succeeds.  If Joe also rolls a Great result on his trait to
avoid being flimflammed (Knowledge of Police Procedure, Learning,
Intelligence, etc. - whatever the GM decides is appropriate), then the
relative degree is 0 - which means the status quo is maintained.  In
this case, Joe remains unconvinced that Lisa is legit.  If Joe rolled
a Superb result, Lisa's Great result would have actually earned her a
relative degree of -1: Joe is not going to be fooled this encounter,
and will probably even have a bad reaction to Lisa.

The Opposed action mechanism can be used to resolve almost any
conflict between two characters.  Are two people both grabbing the
same item at the same time?  This is an Opposed action between their
Dexterity attributes - the winner gets the item.  Is one character
trying to shove another one down?  Roll Strength vs. Strength to see
who goes down.  Someone trying to hide from a search party?
Perception attribute (or Find Hidden skill) vs. Hide skill (or
Camouflage, Stealth, etc.).  Trying to outdrink a rival?  Constitution
vs. Constitution (or Drinking skill, Carousing, etc.).  And so on.

4.6  Combat
-----------

Combat is usually handled as an Opposed action.  The combatants
determine which traits they are rolling against, largely depending on
whether or not they are using a weapon, and what type.  Each combatant
makes an Opposed action roll, as above.  A relative degree of zero
means that the combat round is a stand-off.

[A combat round is an indeterminate length of time set by the GM -
around 3 seconds seems reasonable to some people, while that might
seem grossly short or absurdly long to others.]

If there is a relative degree other than zero, the winner checks to
see if he hit hard enough to damage the loser.  Other combat rounds
may be needed, or one party may attempt to flee, negotiate, etc.

A melee combat round combines offense and defense of both sides into
one roll.  A round is either a stand-off or there is *one* winner -
combatants from only one side can be hurt in a given round.  Ranged
combat, however, may be handled this way, or the GM may determine
Initiative (perhaps by an Initiative attribute modified by
circumstances) and have the opponents alternate taking pot shots at
each other.

If one fighter is *much* smaller than the other (such as a pixie
fighting a human), the GM should assess a penalty of -1 or even -2 to
the larger combatant to hit the small target.  Likewise, there should
be a penalty to make an aimed shot to a specific small body part.
However, if using the Objective Damage System, be sure to add this
modifier back in as damage if the small target is hit.

If one fighter has a positional advantage over the other, there is a
penalty (usually -1) to the fighter in the worse position.  Examples
include bad footing, lower elevation, light in his eyes, etc.  Do not
add this penalty back in as damage if he wins the Opposed action,
though: such things *do* reduce the strength of the blow (hence, the
amount of damage delivered).

All-out offense, such as a berserk attack, gets a +2 to the combat
skill (and an additional +1 for damage, if he wins).  However, if an
all-out attacker ties or loses the Opposed action, the winner gets a
+2 to damage!

An All-out defensive stance earns a +2 to the combat skill, but such a
combatant cannot harm his foe except in critical results.

Optionally, All-out Defense and a successful Perception or Tactics
roll can also give you a bonus on the *next* round.  In this case, the
fighter is taking a turn to scope out the area and maneuver to take
advantage of any terrain or conditional irregularity.  Similar combat
subtleties are possible, and encouraged!

If one combatant is unable to fight in a given round (possibly because
he's unaware of the attacker, or because of a critical result in the
previous round - see Section 4.8, Critical Results), the combat
becomes simply an Unopposed Action for the active fighter, usually
with a Fair degree task.  If a character can defend, such as use a
shield, then it is still an Opposed Action, but the defending
character cannot hurt the other character in such a case.

4.61  Melee Combat
------------------

Melee combat is being close enough to the foe to use the same weapon
repeatedly, without having to throw it.  The weapon used (which can be
simply a fist) determines which trait a fighter uses to roll against,
but otherwise does not affect the Opposed action roll in combat.  The
type of the weapon affects damage, though - see Section 4.7, Damage.

4.62  Multiple Combatants in Melee
----------------------------------

When more than one opponent attacks a single fighter, they have a
positional advantage, at least.  To reflect this, the lone fighter is
at -1 to his skill for each additional foe beyond the first.  The lone
fighter rolls once, and the result is compared with *each* of the
opponents' rolled degrees, one after the other.  The solo combatant
has to defeat *all* of the opponents in order to inflict a wound on
one of them.  The lone fighter can inflict damage on only *one* foe in
any given round - his choice.  But he *takes* multiple wounds in a
single round if two or more enemies hit him!

For epic campaigns, with heroic PCs facing hordes of enemies, the GM
can reduce the penalty to -1 for each two opponents he faces.  Or she
can use these rules as written, but give the hordes Poor skills and
Poor Damage Capacity, which is not out of character for a horde.  It's
also possible to allow a sweeping blow to damage more than one foe at
a time.  Of course, this slows a slash down: reduce damage done by 1
for each foe cut through in this manner.

She can also allow a PC who ties one foe, but scores at least two
rolled degrees better than another, to have hit the second foe and
still defended himself.  Example: Paco is facing three thugs, who have
just rolled a Great, Good, and Mediocre result, respectively.  Paco
rolls a Great result, tying the best thug.  The GM allows him to hit
the thug who rolled a Mediocre result (since he's at +3 rolled
degree), but not be hit himself.  Of course, a well-armored fighter
facing weak opponents can simply concentrate on one foe and let the
others try to get through his armor (that is, not defend himself at
all against some of his attackers).  In this case, each NPC needs an
Unopposed Fair degree task to hit the lone fighter who is ignoring
her.  This is historically accurate for knights wading through peasant
levies, for example.

The number of foes that can attack a single opponent is limited, of
course.  Six is about the maximum under ideal conditions (such as
spear-wielders, or wolves), while only three or four can attack if
using swung weapons (or martial arts requiring a lot of space to
maneuver).  If the lone fighter is in a doorway, only one or two
fighters can reach him, at most.

When multiple NPCs beset a lone PC, the GM may wish to roll only once
for all the NPCs, rather than having to roll for each combatant.  The
lone fighter is still at -1 per extra opponent, but the GM's single
roll is moved one degree closer to zero.  For example, if the GM gets
a +4 result, each attacker actually scores a +3.  A zero result
remains a zero.

Example: 3 NPC pirates, complete with eye-patches, scars, earrings,
sneers and general bad attitudes, are attacking dashing PC hero
Tucker.  The pirates (whose names are Molly, Annie, and Maggie) are
Fair, Good, and Mediocre, respectively, at combat skills.  Tucker is a
Superb swordsman, but is at -2 for having two extra fighters attacking
him at once: his skill is Good for this combat.  The GM wants to roll
just once (applying the result to all three pirates) rather than
rolling three times each combat round.

On the first round, she gets a +2.  This becomes a +1 (moved closer to
zero), and the pirates have just gotten Good, Great, and Fair results,
respectively.  If Tucker scores a Great result that round (equal to
the best pirate result), the round is a stand-off (nobody takes wounds
on either side).  However, if Tucker scored a Superb result, he could
hit the pirate of his choice and remain unhit.  But if poor Tucker
rolled a Fair result, both Molly and Annie would have hit him.

On the next round, the GM rolls a -1 result, but this is moved closer
to zero to become a zero result: Fair, Good, and Mediocre hits for the
pirates.  And so on.

4.63  Ranged Combat
-------------------

Ranged combat may or may not be an Opposed action:

If the target is unaware of the assault, the attacker makes an
Unopposed action roll to see if he hits his target - the GM sets the
degree task based on distance, lighting, cover, etc.

[Do not modify the attacker's skill for range, partial cover, etc. -
that's included in the degree task.  Equipment such as a laser
sighting scope can modify the attacker's skill, though.]

If the defender is aware of the attack, however, it is an Opposed
action: the attacker's ranged weapon skill against the defender's
defensive trait.  (A degree task for range, lighting, etc., is still
set by the GM, and is the minimum rolled degree task needed to hit.)
A defensive roll should be made against a Dodge skill, or Agility
attribute, or something similar.

If the ranged weapon is thrown, there is no modifier to the defense
roll.  However, a propelled weapon, such as a bow, gun, or beam
weapon, is much harder to avoid.  In this case, reduce the defender's
trait by -2 or even -3.

Of course, the defender may decline to dodge, but shoot back instead.
In this case, making the degree task is all that is needed to hit.
The GM may make such actions simultaneous.

Example: Nevada Slim and the El Paso Hombre are facing off in a
showdown. Both are in the open, in the sunlight, so there's no
lighting or cover difficulty.  The range is obviously the same for
both - the GM rules it's a Fair task to hit each other.  Slim rolls a
Poor result, and the Hombre a Mediocre result.  The Hombre's bullet
came closer to Nevada Slim than vice versa, but both missed since they
didn't make the degree task.

Another Example: Will Scarlet is shooting a longbow from the greenwood
at Dicken, the Sheriff's man, who has a crossbow.  Dicken knows Will
is there, because the man next to him just keeled over with an arrow
through his chest.  Dicken is in the open, in good light, so only
range is of any concern to Will Scarlet: the GM says even a Mediocre
shot will hit since they are fairly close.  The range for Dicken to
hit Will is of course the same, but Will is partially hidden behind a
log (cover), and just inside the foliage, so the lighting makes it
hard to see him clearly: a Good roll is needed, the GM decrees.
Dicken rolls a Fair result, missing Will.  Will rolls a Mediocre
result, which hits Dicken, even though it wasn't as good a shot as
Dicken's.

Note that it may seem that Will Scarlet lost the Opposed action, so
his hit shouldn't count.  However, there were actually two Opposed
actions going on once: Dicken's shot vs. Will's Dodge, and Will's shot
vs. Dicken's Dodge.  In this case, if a shooter makes the degree task
needed to hit, he automatically wins the Opposed action, since both
fighters forfeited their Dodges in order to shoot simultaneously.
They would have skewered each other had Dicken's shot hit.

Guns and similar weapons that do not rely on muscle power should be
rated for damage at the beginning of the game.  No detailed list is
provided, but as a rough guideline:

The average small hand gun might be of +2 to +3 Strength, while a
derringer might be +1 or even +0.  Powerful two-handed projectile
weapons will be +5 and higher, while bazookas and other anti-tank
weapons will be +10 and higher.

4.64  Non-human Scale in Combat
-------------------------------

Combat between creatures of different Scale is very straightforward.
Because weapons and armor are scaled along with the wielder's
Strength, no difficult computation is needed.

Basically, once the result of the to-hit roll has been determined
normally, the attacker's Strength Scale is added to his damage, and
the defender's Mass Scale is subtracted from the final damage.  If you
have combat with beings weaker than humans, remember what you learned
in school about adding and subtracting negative numbers . . .

That's all there is to it.  Armor is subtracted as usual, and damage
for weapon size and deadliness is added as usual.  Hits are marked off
from Scratch, Hurt, etc., as usual.

However, a very small character is not likely to be able to wound a
large one in this system.  The GM may allow a point or two of damage
to penetrate if the small character gets a critical success.  Poison-
tipped arrows and lances are also a possibility: the small character
can aim for joints in the armor and merely has to break the skin to
inject the poison.

Also, this system treats Scale like armor, which isn't quite accurate.
In reality, the opponent is slowly carving the larger fighter up, but
each wound is too petty, relative to the large scale, to do much
damage by itself.  To reflect a lot of small wounds gradually
inflicting a hit on a large-scale foe, let each hit that is just
barely stopped by Scale count as half a hit.  "Just barely" depends on
the Scale difference, of course.  For Scale 1, there isn't any half
hit stage, while Scale 10 difference might mean having six or more
hits stopped by scale.

Another way to represent this is to allow a damage roll when Scale
stops the last points of damage.  See Objective Damage System, Section
4.72.

There are also "scale piercing" weapons, such as whale harpoons and
elephant guns.  These don't have massive damage numbers: instead, if
they hit well, simply halve the Scale value, or ignore it all
together.

Combat Examples:

[In all examples, Strength and Mass are at the same Scale.  Also, it
is assumed the GM is not using the optional damage roll, which could
vary damage in all three combat rounds discussed.  See Section 4.72,
Objective Damage System, for details.]

Wilbur, a human knight with a sword, is attacking a dragon.  Wilbur
has Great strength (for a human: +2 to damage) and is using a large
two-handed sword (+3 for size of weapon, +1 for sharpness = +4 to
damage).  If he hits the dragon with a relative degree of +3, he does
3+4+2 = 9 points of damage.  This would be a very severe blow to a
human (even one wearing armor), but the GM had decided in advance that
this dragon is quite hearty: she has a tough hide, Fair Damage
Capacity, and Scale 6 Good Strength.  The dragon's tough hide absorbs
2 points of damage, and she subtracts 6 more for her Scale difference.
This means only 1 hit gets through.  The GM checks off a Scratch for
the dragon, and the fight continues.  Wilbur will have to do this
twice more before he finally Hurts the dragon.  He may need help, or
have to go back for his magic sword!

Another example: Sheba, a human warrior, has just kicked McMurtree, a
wee leprechaun of Fair Damage Capacity and Good Strength, Scale -4.
Sheba wins the first combat round with a relative degree of +1; her
Unarmed Combat skill gives her +1 for a total so far of +2.  She is of
Fair Strength for a human, so there is no bonus or penalty there.
Likewise, her Scale of 0 adds or subtracts nothing: total damage from
her perspective: +2.  However, McMurtree has to subtract his -4 Scale
(which means adding +4 to the damage) bringing it to 6 points of
damage.  Finally, McMurtree's light armor absorbs one point, so 5
points get through.  Since he has Fair Damage Capacity, he takes 2
Scratch hits, 2 Hurt hits and 1 Very Hurt hit - he's at -2 for the
next combat round, and in grave danger if she hits again.

McMurtree's friend, Fionn, now swings his shillelagh at Sheba's knee.
He wins by +3, adds +1 for his Strength (Good, for a leprechaun) and
+2 for the weapon, bringing the total to +6 damage.  But now Fionn
must figure in -4 for his Scale, which reduces the damage to 2 points.
Unfortunately for Fionn, this equals Sheba's armor exactly, so she
takes no damage from an excellently placed hit!  Fionn had better
think of some other strategy, quickly.  Fortunately for Fionn, he
knows some magic, and if he can dodge just one kick from Sheba, she'll
learn the hard way why it's best not to antagonize the Wee folk . . .

4.7  Damage and Healing
-----------------------

Two damage-tracking systems are presented here for use by the GM: one
is simpler than the other, but less defined.

In each system, damage to a character can be described as being at one
of five stages of severity.  The stages are:

Just A Scratch: no real game effect, except to create tension.  In the
     Objective system, this will lead to being hurt if the character
     is hit again.  (This effect is optional in the Subjective
     system.)

Hurt: the character is wounded enough to slow him down a little: -1 to
     all traits which would logically be affected.

Very Hurt: the character is severely wounded, possibly stumbling: -2
     to all traits which would logically be affected.

Incapacitated: the character is so badly wounded as to be incapable of
     any actions, except possibly dragging himself a few feet every
     now and then and gasping out an important message.  Roll a Fair
     degree task against Constitution to stay conscious.  A very
     lenient GM might allow an Incapacitated character to perform such
     complicated actions as opening a door or grabbing a gem. . .

Near Death: the character is not only unconscious, he'll die in a few
     minutes without outside medical help.  No one recovers from Near
     Death on their own.

Dead: he has no more use for his possessions; may as well help
     yourself.

A very easy way to keep track of wounds is with cards: give a player
one face-down card when his character is Hurt, and another face-down
card when his character is Very Hurt.  He gets rid of them when the
character is healed.  Face-up cards represent fatigue - the character
is reeling from exhaustion.  He gets rid of those by resting.  (A
character can get fatigued by anything that fatigues real people:
physical or mental activity, work, stress, etc.  Note that casting
spells, using psi powers, etc., might or might not count as fatiguing
mental activity.)

Each card the character has represents a -1 to traits that would
logically be affected until the third, which represents
incapacitation.

The GM may allow a high Will degree task to nullify penalties.

The cards may also describe hit location, if desired: a black card is
the torso, while a red card means an extremity.  The lower the red
card, the lower the extremity; the higher the red card, the higher the
wound on the body.

Some players take delight in describing their wounds in detail, even
writing such scars into the character story!

Automatic Death: sometimes you don't have to roll the dice: holding a
knife to a helpless character's throat is a good example - no roll
needed to kill such a character, but your Karma suffers.

4.71  Subjective Damage System
------------------------------

The GM considers all of the factors below (possibly writing them down,
the better to weigh them), and then simply announces how hurt the
defender is, using one of the stages listed above.

1) The relative degree the attack succeeded by - the better the hit,
   the more likelihood of damage.  Winning a combat round with a
   relative degree of +1 means you just hit her somewhere, probably
   where she's most heavily armored.  Scoring a hit with a +3,
   however, means you may have found a chink in the armor.

2) The defender's armor.  People wearing thicker armor, and more of
   it, tend to get hurt less than those wearing no armor.  Armor can
   be finely defined, or simply said to be Light, Medium, or Heavy
   armor.  SF scenarios might have Extra-Heavy armor.

3) The deadliness of the attacker's weapon.  Big weapons tend to do
   more damage than little weapons; sharp weapons rip tissue more than
   dull ones.  People trained in Karate tend to do more damage than
   those untrained in any martial art.

4) The strength of the blow.  For muscle-powered weapons, such as
   melee weapons, unarmed attacks, bows, slings, etc., this is
   determined by the attacker's Strength attribute: stronger folks
   tend to hit harder.  For things like guns, beam weapons, etc., it
   is relative to the nature of the weapon: a .38 usually does more
   damage than a .22.

5) The amount of damage the victim can soak up (Robustness, Damage
   Capacity, or Mass).  Big, healthy guys can take more damage before
   collapsing than little, sickly guys, usually.  But it's your call
   if it's a big, sickly fighter against a little, healthy fellow.

4.72  Objective Damage System
-----------------------------

This system quantifies damage more than the other, and is quite
mechanical.  Damage consists of three parts: Basic Damage, the
attacker's Offensive Damage Modifier, and the defender's Defensive
Damage Modifier.  (There is a fourth optional part: the damage roll.)

Thus:

Total Damage = Basic Damage + Off. Dam. Mod. + Def. Dam. Mod. [+ roll]

Basic Damage = relative degree by which the winner hit the loser.

    Example: if Lisa rolls a Great combat result and Joe only a Fair
    result, Lisa has hit Joe for two points of damage.

    [Note: This means that a weapon of +1 to hit also does +1 to
    damage automatically if it hits.  To represent a weapon that gives
    a bonus to hit, but *not* to damage, subtract 1 from the total
    damage at this point.  Example: Snorri has a magic sword that lets
    him hit his foes easier, but doesn't do any special damage.
    Snorri gets a +1 to hit anybody, but if he hits, he subtracts 1
    from the damage.]

The Offensive Damage Modifier should be calculated at character
creation for ease in use during play.  It consists of the following
elements, and can be written by each weapon on the character sheet:

For attacker's muscle-powered weapon:
    +0 for no weapon, no Martial Art skill.
    +1 Martial Art skill at Fair or better, no weapon.
    +1 for small weapon (knife, etc.)
    +2 for average-sized weapon (sword, axe, spear, bow, etc.).
    +3 for large weapon (polearm, battleaxe, etc.).
    +1 for sharp weapon (additive with other weapon damage).

For attacker's Strength (muscle-powered weapons only):
    -3 for Terrible Strength.
    -2 for Poor Strength.
    -1 for Mediocre Strength.
    +0 for Fair Strength.
    +1 for Good Strength.
    +2 for Great Strength.
    +3 for Superb Strength.

For weapon's Strength (Guns, Crossbows, Beam weapons, etc.,):
    +/- Strength of weapon (see Section 4.63, Ranged Combat).

For Attacker's Scale:
    Plus the attacker's Mass Scale (see Section 4.64).
        [Note: the attacker's Mass Scale is relevant only for muscle-
        powered weapons and for those projectile weapons scaled to the
        attacker's size, such as miniature bazookas or giant-sized
        handguns.  A superhero of Scale 10 using an ordinary pistol
        would *not* figure his Scale into the Offensive Damage
        Modifier.]

     Example of Offensive Damage Modifier: Jeb the Dwarf has Scale 1,
     Great Strength (+2), and uses a one-handed axe of +3 damage.  On
     his character sheet, Jeb would have: "One-handed Axe, +3 damage
     (Off.Dam.Mod.: +6)."

The Defensive Damage Modifier should likewise be written on the
character sheet, and consists of:

For defender's armor:
    -1 or -2 for a good shield (additive with other armor).  (Note: a
        -2 shield is *very* large and cumbersome to carry.)
    -1 for light, pliable non-metal armor.
    -2 for heavy, rigid non-metal armor
    -2 for light metal armor.
    -3 for medium metal armor.
    -4 for heavy metal armor.
    -5 or more for SF advanced armor.

For Defender's Mass Scale:
     Minus the defender's Mass Scale (see Section 4.64), which is
     always figured in.  (If the defender has Mass other than Fair, it
     should also be figured in.)

     Example of Defensive Damage Modifier: Jeb the Dwarf is of Scale
     1, and wears heavy non-metal armor (-2) and carries a regular
     shield (-1).  On the character sheet, the player would list:
     "Shield: -1; Hvy non-metal armor: -2 (Def.Dam.Mod: -3 w/out
     shield; -4 w/shield)."

Optional Damage Roll:
    First, make all calculations above; the damage at this point is
    called the *calculated* damage.  The attacker then makes a simple
    Unopposed damage roll, which is not based on any trait.  The
    result, which will range from -4 to +4, is applied to the
    calculated damage to produce the final damage.  However, the
    calculated damage cannot be more than doubled by this roll.
    (Exception: if the calculated damage is negative or zero, it may
    be brought up to +1, maximum, by a damage roll.)  Also, if the
    calculated damage is a positive number, the die roll cannot reduce
    the final damage below 1.

    First Example: The calculated damage is found to be -2 due to
    armor and Scale.  It would take a +3 or +4 result to actually
    inflict a wound on the defender in this case, and then only 1
    point of damage.  Second Example: The calculated damage is +2.  A
    damage roll of +4, +3, or +2 results in +4 final damage, since
    calculated damage cannot be more than doubled by a damage roll.  A
    damage roll of +1 results in +3 final damage, while a damage roll
    of 0 results in +2 final damage.  Any negative die roll results in
    +1 final damage, since a positive calculated damage cannot be
    reduced below 1 by a damage roll.

Once the final damage is determined, the different levels of Damage
Capacity take wounds as follows:

              Scratch  Hurt  Very Hurt  Incapacitated  Near Death
Terrible         1       1       1           1              2
Poor             2       1       1           2              2
Mediocre         2       2       1           2              2
Fair             2       2       2           2              2
Good             3       2       2           3              2
Great            3       3       2           3              2
Superb           3       3       3           3              2
Legendary        4       3       3           4              2

Wounds are cumulative.  That is, the first two wounds to a character
with Fair Damage Capacity count as Scratches, and the next wound will
Hurt the character.  The fifth wound will make the character Very
Hurt, and so on, until the eleventh wound, which will kill the
character.  Someone who has taken two Hurt wounds is still only at -1;
he is not at -2 until he takes his first Very Hurt wound.

The player should write the character's wound progression on the
character sheet.

The wound progression above makes for a fairly realistic campaign.
For a more cinematic campaign (especially those without magic or
science fiction healing), add an extra Scratch (and maybe even Hurt)
to each level.  It wouldn't be out of line, for an epic scale game, to
add 2 levels of Scratch and Hurt to each PC.  This would mean little
blows wouldn't accumulate so quickly to hinder the character.

Another way to be sure someone isn't nicked to death is to require a
large blow to move a character from Very Hurt to Incapacitated, and
from Incapacitated to Near Death.  A large blow, in this case, can
mean anything from 3 points to 5 or more in one hit.

4.73  Knockout Damage
---------------------

In either system, a player can announce that his character is simply
going for knock-out damage rather than killing damage.  In this case,
Hurt and Very Hurt simply count as additional Scratch levels: it takes
an Incapacitated result to knock a character out, but there is no
penalty for being Hurt or Very Hurt on the way.  A knocked-out
character doesn't need healing to recuperate to full health - just
time.

The GM may simply decide that a successful Good blow (or better) to
the head knocks someone out automatically.  In an Opposed action, the
Good blow would also have to win the combat, of course.

4.74  Healing
-------------

Healing is done through a medical skill (or supernormal power).  A
Scratch is too insignificant to require a roll on a healing skill (or
it might require a kiss to make it better . . .).  A Good result heals
all Hurt wounds; a Great result heals all Very Hurt (as well as Hurt)
wounds, and a Superb result heals an Incapacitated character.

Otherwise, wounds heal on their own at one wound level per week of
rest.  That is, all Incapacitated wounds heal together, then all Very
Hurt wounds, etc.  (The healing rate of Scratches depends on the GM's
level of realism.  They may disappear automatically once you are out
of combat time, or they may linger on for a day.)  The GM may also
require a successful roll against some sort of Constitution attribute:
Fair degree task for Hurt, Good for Very Hurt, and Great for
Incapacitated.  Failing this roll means slow healing.  Someone Near
Death should take a long time to heal, even with magical healing.

Of course, healing with realistic medical skills takes time: the
success of the roll merely insures the wounds *will* heal, given
enough rest.  How long this takes depends on the technological level
of the game setting, and is up to the GM.  (A day per treated wound is
extremely fast healing, but may be appropriate in an epic-style game.
Likewise, one minute per magically healed wound is still fast.)
Whether or not strenuous activity before the healing period ends
reopens a wound is also left up to the GM . . .

4.8  Critical Results
---------------------

Not every GM likes the concept of Critical Results.  For those who use
them, a natural rolled result of +4 can be considered a critical
success - the character has done exceptionally well, and the GM may
grant some special bonus to the action.  Likewise, a natural result of
-4 is a critical failure, or fumble, and the character has done as
poorly as he possibly can in the given situation.

Note that achieving +/-4 with die modifiers does not count as a
critical result, though the character *has* done exceptionally well or
poorly.  When a natural critical result is rolled, it is not
necessarily treated as a +/-4: instead, the GM may ignore what the
rolled degree would be, and call it a trans-superb or trans-terrible
result automatically.

Optionally, if a character gets a rolled degree four or more levels
better than the degree task, he has gotten a critical success.
Likewise, four levels below a degree task is a critical failure.

A critical result in combat can mean many things: one fighter falls
down, or drops his weapon, or is hurt extra badly, or is stunned for a
round and can't even defend himself, or is temporarily blinded, or
knocked out, etc.  The GM should be creative, but not kill a character
outright!  The GM may even wish to make a table, such as:

Roll 2D6:
 2   Blinded for the next combat round - no defense or offense!
 3   Fall down: skill at -2.
 4   Armor badly ripped - no armor value rest of fight!
 5   Weapon finds chink in armor - do not subtract for armor.
 6   Off balance - skill at -1 next turn.
 7   Drop Weapon.
 8   Weapon breaks, but still useful: -1 to damage.
Etc.

If you come up with some good critical results, please add them to the
Addenda!  This is an easy way to achieve a lot of detail without
complicating FUDGE.

4.9  NPC Reactions
------------------

Sometimes a non-player character has a set reaction to the PCs.
Perhaps she's automatically their enemy, or perhaps the party has
rescued her, and earned her gratitude.

However, there will be many NPCs that don't have a set reaction.  When
the PCs request information or aid, it might go smoothly or it might
not go well at all.  Negotiation with a stranger is always an unknown
quantity to the players - it may so for the GM, too!

When in doubt, the GM should secretly roll 2d6.  If the PC in question
has a trait that might affect a stranger's reaction, this should be
grant a +/-1 to the roll.  Examples include Appearance (which could be
an attribute, gift or fault), Charisma, Reputation, Status, and such
habits as nose-picking or vulgar language.

The Reaction roll can also be modified up or down by circumstances:
bribes, suspicious or friendly nature of the NPC, proximity of the
NPC's boss, observed PC behavior, etc.

The higher the Reaction roll, the better the reaction.  A result of 6
to 8 is Fair, for example: the NPC will be mildly helpful, but only if
it's not too much effort.  She won't be helpful at all on Mediocre or
worse results, but will react well on a Good result or better.

Example: Nathaniel needs some information about the local duke, who he
suspects is very corrupt.  He has observed that folks are reticent to
talk about the duke to strangers.  Nathaniel decides to approach a
certain vegetable seller at the open market who seems to be quite
talkative.  Nathaniel has an average appearance (no modifier there),
but is charismatic: +1 to any Reaction roll.  He makes small talk for
a while, then slowly brings the duke into the conversation at a
fitting moment.  The GM decides this was done skillfully enough to
warrant another +1 on the reaction roll.  However, the situation is
prickly: -2 in general to elicit *any* information about the sinister
local ruler.  This cancels Nathaniel's bonuses, so it's just a
straight Reaction roll.  The GM rolls in secret, and gets an 8: a Fair
result.  The old lady slips out one or two bits of useful information
before realizing what she's just done.  At that point she clams up,
but Nathaniel casually changes the subject to the weather, dispelling
her suspicions.  He wanders off fairly quickly to try his luck at
another stand, more determined than ever to be *very* careful.

[End of Chapter 4.  FUDGE continued next file ...]
-- 
  - Steffan O'Sullivan		         sos@oz.plymouth.edu

X-NEWS: wharton rec.games.frp.archives: 470
Path: netnews.upenn.edu!dsinc!spool.mu.edu!howland.reston.ans.net!gatech!news.ans.net!rpi!goldm
From: sos@oz.plymouth.edu (Steffan O'Sullivan)
Newsgroups: rec.games.frp.archives
Subject: FUDGE July93: Part 4 of 4
Message-ID: <221fds$46v@usenet.rpi.edu>
Date: 14 Jul 93 17:23:08 GMT
Sender: goldm@operators.its.rpi.edu
Reply-To: sos@oz.plymouth.edu (Steffan O'Sullivan)
Followup-To: rec.games.frp.misc
Organization: Plymouth State College - Plymouth, N.H.
Lines: 716
Approved: goldm@rpi.edu
NNTP-Posting-Host: operators.its.rpi.edu


          FUDGE: Freeform, Universal, Donated Gaming Engine
                   A Free Role-playing Game (RPG).
                        By Steffan O'Sullivan

Legal Notice
------------

Version: July 4, 1993

FUDGE is copyright 1992, 1993 by Steffan O'Sullivan.  It may be freely
copied and distributed by any means desired.  This legal notice must
be included with each copy of FUDGE.  No charge may be made for FUDGE
beyond a maximum US$6 fee (at 1993 rates) for materials and shipping,
without written permission from the author.

A publisher who wishes to include FUDGE in a book of copyrighted
source material or adventures may do so, so long as (1) the
publisher's copyrighted material is longer than the amount of FUDGE
material included, (2) this legal notice and at least Chapter 1 of
FUDGE are included, (3) the words in this legal notice and those in
Chapter 1 of FUDGE are not changed in any way, and (4) there is no
extra charge for including FUDGE in the book.

FUDGE was first published in 1992 on internet, and was written by
Steffan O'Sullivan (sos@oz.plymouth.edu) with an extensive amount of
high-quality input from Andy Skinner.  Other valued contributors
include Martin Bergendahl, Thomas Brettinger, Robert Bridson, Travis
Casey, Paul Jason Clegg, Peter F. Delaney, Jay Doane, Brian Edmonds,
Shawn Garbett, Ed Heil, Bernard Hsiung, John H. Kim, Christian
Otkjaer, Bill Seurer, Larry Smith, Stephan Szabo, and others on
rec.games.design on internet.

Groo the Wanderer (TM) is a trademark of Sergio Aragones, and use of
the name does not challenge the trademark status in any way.


[Continued from previous file:]

Table of Contents (This File)
=============================

5  Character Development
    5.1  Subjective Character Development
    5.2  Objective Character Development
6  Tips and Examples
    6.1  GM Tips
    6.2  Character Sheet Example
    6.3  Character Examples
    6.4  Animal & Creature Examples

5  Character Development
========================

After playing a bit, perhaps each session, the player will want the
character to grow in abilities.  At this point, initial GM-set skill
limits (such as 1 Superb, 4 Greats) can be exceeded as the character
naturally develops.  There are two ways to handle character
development, or "experience," as it's often called.

5.1  Subjective Character Development
-------------------------------------

When the player feels the character has accomplished enough to warrant
improving in some trait (and he feels he's been roleplaying well), he
petitions the GM for permission to raise it.  A trait can only be
raised one level at a time.  A trait must be used much more to raise
it from Good to Great than Fair to Good, and so on.

Likewise, the GM can simply award an improvement in a trait she feels
deserves to be raised.  In these cases, there is never a corresponding
reduction of another trait - this is character development, not
creation.

5.2  Objective Character Development
------------------------------------

Alternately, the GM can award experience points (EP), which the player
can trade in any way he wants at the following rates (a trait can only
be raised one level at a time, however):

Raising a skill up to Fair level: 1 EP per level.
Raising a skill from Fair to Good: 2 EP.
Raising a skill from Good to Great: 4 EP.
Raising a skill from Great to Superb: 8 EP.
Raising a skill from Superb to Legendary: 16 EP (or more), *and* GM
       approval.
Raising a skill from Legendary to Legendary, 2nd Level: 30 EP (or
       more), *and* GM approval.
Raising a skill each level beyond Legendary, 2nd Level: 50 EP (or
       more), *and* GM approval.
Raising an attribute: triple the cost for skills of the same level.
Adding a gift: 6 EP (or more), *and* GM approval.
Adding a supernormal power: 12 EP (or more), *and* GM approval.

The GM may adjust these point levels as she sees fit, of course, and
should require that the skills being raised are those that were used
significantly during an adventure.

As a guideline, good roleplaying should be rewarded with 1 to 4 EP per
gaming session, with an upper suggested limit of 5 EP for flawless
roleplaying.  Players may save EP as long as they wish.


6  Tips and Examples
====================

6.1  GM Tips
------------

Always remember the main point of the game is to have fun . . .

The GM should translate at least one of her favorite characters into
FUDGE from whatever system she is used to.  This will give her a good
idea of what traits to choose, and how many.

Note that FUDGE is incredibly flexible, possibly more so than any
system you've played before.  Once you've translated a favorite
character, fiddle with her a bit.  Can you tweak her to be *exactly*
what you want, possibly in ways your previous system wouldn't allow?
What if that attribute was split into two or three effects - ah!  See,
she can be smart in some ways, but dumb in others; knowledgeable of
some things, ignorant of others.  Hmm - too many attributes?  Make
some of them gifts, then - that might be easier to deal with.  And so
on - have fun!

6.2  Character Sheet Example
----------------------------

A character sheet can be any scrap paper, of course.  However, it's
handy to include the Action-Resolution Table, Trait Level progression,
and enough space for each type of trait.

Sample [delete any note in square brackets, such as this]:

/--------------------------------\  Character Name:
|               Defaults:   | EP |    Player:
| -3 Terrible               | 1  |  Date Created:
| -2 Poor ..... Most Skills | 1  |
| -1 Mediocre               | 1  |  Unspent EP:
|  0 Fair ..... Attributes  | 1  |
|  1 Good                   | 2  |  Starting Limits: [such as
|  2 Great                  | 4  |   1 Superb Skill, 3 Great,
|  3 Superb                 | 8  |   no magic, etc.]
|--------------------------------|
| Some Skills and most Gifts are |  Character Story (include
|  non-existent unless specified |      personality):
|  on the character sheet.       |
|--------------------------------|
| EP = Raising skills to that    |
|   level with Experience Points |
\--------------------------------/

Rolled:  2  |  3  |  4  |  5  |  6 , 7 , 8  |  9  | 10  | 11  | 12
------------|-----|-----|-----|-------------|-----|-----|-----|---
Levels: -4  | -3  | -2  | -1  |     +0      | +1  | +2  | +3  | +4

Wound Progression (Write Number of each to match Damage Capacity):
  Scratch     Hurt     Very Hurt    Incapacitated     Near Death
                                                           2
----------------------------------------------------------------------
   Attributes:         |        Gifts:             |        Skills:
-----------------------|---------------------------|------------------
                       |                           |
  [space as needed in each section - the GM can include some before
   printing, if desired - especially true for Attributes]
                       |                           |
Damage Cap:            |---------------------------|
-----------------------|        Faults:            |
    Equipment:         |---------------------------|
-----------------------|                           |
                       |                           |
 [Could go on the      |                           |
  back if space        |---------------------------|
  is a problem.        |   Supernormal Powers:     |
  Remember to list     |---------------------------|
  armor and weapon     |                           |
  bonuses clearly.]    |       [if needed]         |

[End of sample.  You should be able to get it on a single page.]

For those using the Objective Character Creation system, the following
character sheet header is more appropriate than the one above:

/----------------------------------\  Character Name:
|              Att | Sk | N-E | EP |    Player:
| Terrible ..  -3  | -1 |  1  | 1  |  Date Created:
| Poor ......  -2  |  0 |  2  | 1  |
| Mediocre ..  -1  |  1 |  3  | 1  |  Unspent EP:
| Fair ......   0  |  2 |  4  | 1  |
| Good ......   1  |  3 |  5  | 2  |  Starting Limits: [such as
| Great .....   2  |  4 |  6  | 4  |   1 Superb Skill, 3 Great,
| Superb ....   3  |  5 |  7  | 8  |   no magic, etc.]
|----------------------------------|
| Att = Attribute Costs            |  Character Story (include
| Sk = Average Skill Costs         |      personality):
| N-E = Non-Existent Skill Costs   |
| EP = Raising skills with EPs     |
|----------------------------------|
| Trading Traits: 1 gift = 1 fault |
| 1 gift = 1 to 2 attribute levels |
| 1 attribute level = 3 skill lvls |
| 1 supernormal power = 2 gifts    |
\----------------------------------/

6.3  Character Examples
-----------------------

The following characters are designed to different GM standards, to
give examples of the different possibilities.  Each character lists GM
guidelines with it.  Easy and Hard skills are listed as: Farming
(easy); Mimic Animal Sounds (hard).  Skills that start non-existent
are listed as: Elvish Language (n-e).  Brogo and Moose have some magic
abilities, using the sample FUDGE Magic system found in the Addenda.
Brogo is just a dabbler in magic, while Moose is only slightly better.

The numbers in parentheses are the Objective level costs, and are
optional on any given character sheet (but make it easy to tally).

6.31  Brogo the Halfling, Fantasy character (Scout)
---------------------------------------------------

[GM limits: 8 attributes (4 free levels); 50 free skill levels,
w/maximum of 1 Superb, 3 Greats; 2 free gifts; magic available.  Scale
-2, Racial Bonus: Damage Capacity +1, Health +1.]

[Note that Brogo has lowered four *useful* skills to Terrible to
balance his skill levels to 50 - otherwise, he would have 54.]

Attributes:  (4 free levels, 8 levels taken, balanced by 2 faults)
     Coolness: Good                                    (1)
     Damage Capacity: Good  [Halfling Fair]            (1)
     Dexterity: Great                                  (2)
     Empathy: Good                                     (1)
     Health: Good  [Halfling Fair]                     (1)
     Intelligence: Good                                (1)
     Perception: Great                                 (2)
     Strength: Good, Scale -2                          (-1)
Skills: (50 free levels, 50 taken)
     Area Knowledge, large area (easy): Good           (2)
     Bow: Good                                         (3)
     Carouse: Fair                                     (2)
     Climbing: Good                                    (3)
     Elvish Language (n-e): Poor                       (2)
     Evaluate Goods: Fair                              (2)
     Farming (easy): Good                              (2)
     Find Secret Passages: Terrible                    (-1)
     First Aid: Good                                   (3)
     Haggle: Good                                      (3)
     Interrogation: Terrible                           (-1)
     Knowledge of Old Tales: Fair                      (2)
     Lockpicking: Terrible                             (-1)
     Mimic Animal Noises (hard): Great                 (5)
     Move Quietly: Superb                              (5)
     Orcish Language (n-e): Poor                       (2)
     Pickpocketing: Terrible                           (-1)
     Riding: Pony: Fair                                (2)
     Staff: Good                                       (3)
     Storytelling: Fair                                (2)
     Survival: Great                                   (4)
     Tracking: Good                                    (3)
     Wildcraft: Great                                  (4)
Gifts and Faults: (2 free gifts, 6 taken, balanced by faults)
     Gift: Absolute Direction
     Gift: Animal Empathy
     Gift: Lucky
     Gift: Night Vision
     Supernormal Power: Magic Potential 1 (Note: spell-casting is
         equal to Will in this game, max: Fair - no skill need be
         bought.)
     Superfault: Can only cast trivial spells
     Fault: Curious
     Fault: Glutton
     Fault: Humanitarian (takes low pay)
     Fault: Self-defense Pacifist

6.32  Moose the Mage, human fantasy character
---------------------------------------------

[GM limits: 6 attributes (3 free levels); 30 free skill levels,
w/maximum of 1 Superb, 3 Greats; 2 free gifts; magic available.  This
generous GM has set the Damage Capacity level equal to Health, so
Moose has Great Damage Capacity at no extra cost.]

Attributes: (3 free levels, 4 levels taken, balanced by a fault)
     Charisma: Poor                                    (-2)
     Dexterity: Great                                  (2)
     Drive: Good                                       (1)
     Health: Great                                     (2)
     Intelligence: Mediocre                            (-1)
     Strength: Great                                   (2)
Skills: (30 free levels, 36 taken, balanced by a fault)
     Armoury: Good                                     (3)
     Brawling: Great                                   (4)
     Breaking and Entering: Terrible                   (-1)
     Climbing: Fair                                    (2)
     Crafts: Fair                                      (2)
     Flirtatious Skills: Terrible                      (-1)
     Knowledge of Old Tales: Terrible                  (-1)
     Merchant: Mediocre                                (1)
     Riding: Good                                      (3)
     Shield: Great                                     (4)
     Singing: Terrible                                 (-1)
     * Spell-Casting (n-e): Mediocre                   (6)
     Stealth: Good                                     (3)
     Storytelling: Terrible                            (-1)
     Sword: Superb                                     (5)
     Tactics: Good                                     (3)
     Throwing: Great                                   (4)
     Woodcraft: Mediocre                               (1)
Gifts and Faults: (2 free gifts, 6 taken, balanced by faults)
     Gift: Combat Reflexes
     Gift: Comfortable Wealth (good equipment)
     Supernormal Power: Magic Potential
     Supernormal Power: Magic Potential, 2nd level
     Fault: Can only cast combat spells
     Fault: Fear of the Dark
     Fault: Pompous with strangers (except when drunk)
     * Fault: Spell-casting skill costs double due to low IQ
     Fault: Tends to Bellow when Speaking
     Fault: Illiterate but tries to hide it

6.33  Tarag Half-Ogre
---------------------

[GM limits: 3 attributes (3 free levels); 10 free skill levels,
w/maximum of 1 Superb, 2 Greats; 3 free gifts; magic available.
Half-Ogre is Scale 3.]

Attributes: (3 free levels, 1 taken.  The other 2 traded for Gift)
     Body: Good, Scale 3                               (1)
     Mind: Mediocre                                    (-1)
     Psyche: Good                                      (1)
Skills: (10 free levels, 16 taken, balanced by fault)
     Animal Skills: Fair                               (2)
     Balance Skills: Good                              (3)
     Medical Skills: Terrible                          (-1)
     Melee Weapons: Superb                             (5)
     Merchant Skills: Terrible                         (-1)
     Ranged Weapons: Great                             (4)
     Social Skills: Terrible                           (-1)
     Survival: Good                                    (3)
     Thief Skills: Terrible                            (-1)
     Unarmed Combat: Good                              (3)
Gifts and Faults: (3 free gifts, 5 taken, balanced by fault and
         trading 2 Attribute levels = 1 gift)
     Gift: Lucky
     Gift: Quick Reflexes
     Gift: Tough Hide (-1 to damage)
     Supernormal Power: Scale 3 (counts as 2 gifts)
     Fault: Berserker
     Fault: Poor (not much equipment)

6.34  Henri le Rouge, Musketeer of King Louis XIII, 1627
--------------------------------------------------------

[GM limits: since this is a cinematic campaign without magical or SF
healing, the GM has set higher limits: 9 attributes (8 free levels);
60 free skill levels, w/maximum of 2 Superb, 5 Greats; 3 free gifts;
no supernormal powers available]

Attributes: (8 free levels, 10 taken, balanced by fault)
     Charm: Good                                       (1)
     Coolness: Great                                   (2)
     Damage Capacity: Great                            (2)
     Dexterity: Great                                  (2)
     Health: Good                                      (1)
     Perception: Fair                                  (0)
     Strength: Fair                                    (0)
     Will: Fair                                        (0)
     Wit: Great                                        (2)
Skills: (60 free levels, 72 taken, balanced by 2 faults)
     Acrobatics: Superb                                (5)
     Acting: Good                                      (3)
     Boating: Terrible                                 (-1)
     Brawling: Good                                    (3)
     Carousing: Good                                   (3)
     Climbing: Great                                   (4)
     Disguise: Good                                    (3)
     Dodge: Good                                       (3)
     Engineer: Terrible                                (-1)
     Fencing: Superb                                   (5)
     First Aid: Good                                   (3)
     Flirting: Good                                    (3)
     Knowledge of Europe: Mediocre                     (1)
     Knowledge of France: Good                         (3)
     Knowledge of Paris: Good                          (3)
     Knowledge of Planet: Mediocre                     (1)
     Lockpicking: Terrible                             (-1)
     Main Gauche: Great                                (4)
     Matchlock Musket: Good                            (3)
     Mechanic: Terrible                                (-1)
     Move Quietly: Good                                (3)
     Political Knowledge: Good                         (3)
     Quick-Draw Sword (easy): Good                     (2)
     Repartee: Great                                   (4)
     Riding: Great                                     (4)
     Savoir-Faire: Good                                (3)
     Shadowing: Fair                                   (2)
     Swimming: Terrible                                (-1)
     Tactics: Good                                     (3)
     Wheellock Pistol: Good                            (3)
Gifts and Faults (3 free gifts, 5 taken, balanced by faults)
     Gift: Combat Reflexes
     Gift: Handsome
     Gift: Patron: Captain of Musketeers
     Gift: Rapid Healing
     Gift: Status: Gentleman
     Fault: Code of Honor
     Fault: Compulsive Carouser
     Fault: Disgusted by Non-Gourmet Food
     Fault: Extremely Loyal to Companions
     Fault: Intolerant of Protestants

6.35  Chicory, Bunny
--------------------

[NOTE: this is a character in a game where rabbits are the norm, and
humans are giant monsters.  The scale is therefore relative to
rabbits.  GM limits: 6 attributes (3 free levels); 40 free skill
levels, w/maximum 1 Superb, 3 Great; 2 gifts, 1 Supernormal Power]

Attributes: (3 free levels, 6 taken, balanced by faults)
     Dexterity: Good                                   (1)
     Health: Good                                      (1)
     Perception: Superb                                (3)
     Smarts: Good                                      (1)
     Speed: Good                                       (1)
     Strength: Mediocre                                (-1)
Skills: (40 free levels, 52 taken, balanced by taking no Supernormal
         Power)
     Acrobatics: Terrible                              (-1)
     Area Knowledge: Good                              (3)
     Detect Traps: Great                               (4)
     Fighting: Good                                    (3)
     Gambling: Good                                    (3)
     Herb Lore (hard): Superb                          (6)
     Knowledge of Burrow Structure: Good               (3)
     Knowledge of Humans (n-e): Fair                   (4)
     Knowledge of Non-Rabbit Behavior: Good            (3)
     Language: Bug (n-e): Mediocre                     (3)
     Language: Common Bird (n-e): Fair                 (4)
     Language: Mouse/Rat (n-e): Good                   (5)
     Mechanical Skills: Terrible                       (-1)
     Mimic Non-Rabbit Sounds (hard): Fair              (3)
     Move Quietly: Fair                                (2)
     Spring Traps: Fair                                (2)
     Storytelling: Fair                                (2)
     Tracking: Great                                   (4)
Gifts and Faults: (2 free + 1 Supernormal Power; 4 taken, balanced by
         faults.  See skills, above.)
     Gift: Unafraid of Loud Noises
     Gift: Never Forgets a Scent
     Gift: Strong Will
     Gift: Night Vision
     Fault: Curious
     Fault: Compulsive Gambler
     Fault: Phobia: Canines
     Fault: Jealous of Anyone Getting More Attention

6.36  Sarah Roberts, Journalist, 1990s
--------------------------------------

[GM limits: 10 attributes (5 free levels); 50 free skill levels,
w/maximum of 1 Superb, 4 Greats; 2 free gifts; limited Psi available.]

[Note: The player forgot a very important skill for Sarah: Research.
This was realized during a game, and since she would logically have
the skill, the player petitioned the GM to allow Research to be one of
the Uncommitted traits.  The GM agreed, and [Research: Good] was added
to Sarah's character sheet.  Sarah already has 1 Superb and 4 Great
skills, so this is the best she could start with it.  This does not
count against starting free levels - Uncommitted traits are extra.]

Attributes: (5 free levels, 7 taken, balanced by fault)
     Appearance: Good                                  (1)
     Constitution: Good                                (1)
     Coolness: Good                                    (1)
     Damage Capacity: Good                             (1)
     Dexterity: Fair                                   (0)
     Intelligence: Great                               (2)
     Luck: Good                                        (1)
     Sanity: Great                                     (2)
     Strength: Poor                                    (-2)
     Will: Fair                                        (0)
Skills: (50 free levels, 56 taken, balanced by fault)
     Acrobatics: Fair                                  (2)
     Acting: Great                                     (4)
     Breaking & Entering: Good                         (3)
     Climbing: Fair                                    (2)
     Computer Use: Good                                (3)
     Criminology: Mediocre                             (1)
     Disguise: Great                                   (4)
     Driving: Good                                     (3)
     Interviewing: Great                               (4)
     Karate (n-e): Fair                                (4)
     Move Quietly: Good                                (3)
     Occultism: Good                                   (3)
     Photography: Good                                 (3)
     Pistol: Good                                      (3)
     Shadowing: Great                                  (4)
     Shady Contacts: Good                              (3)
     Swimming: Fair                                    (2)
     Writing: Superb                                   (5)
Gifts and Faults: (2 free Gifts, 4 taken, balanced by faults)
     Gift: Ambidextrous
     Gift: Beautiful Speaking Voice
     Gift: Danger Sense
     Gift: Never Forget a Face
     Fault: Overconfident
     Fault: Extremely Curious about Occult Matters
     Fault: Stubborn
     Fault: Vain

6.37  Sherman Foley, homeless person and scanner, modern day
------------------------------------------------------------

[By: Bernard Hsiung]

[GM limits: no specified attributes--free levels = 1/2 of number of
attributes taken; 50 free skill levels, w/maximum of 1 Superb, 4
Greats; 2 free gifts; semi-limited Psi]

[Note that Sherman's player only chose 4 attributes when the GM gave
free reign.  This means that Sherman has any unlisted attribute the GM
considers essential at Fair.]

Attributes: (4 attributes selected: 2 free levels, 2 taken)
     Damage Capacity: Mediocre                         (-1)
     Health: Mediocre                                  (-1)
     Perception: Great                                 (2)
     Willpower: Great                                  (2)
Skills: (50 free levels, 44 taken, 6 used to balance 1 gift)
     Area Knowledge, inner city (easy): Great          (3)
     Area Knowledge, Earth: Mediocre                   (1)
     Begging: Fair                                     (2)
     Climbing: Terrible                                (-1)
     Drinking: Good                                    (3)
     Driving: Terrible                                 (-1)
     Forage: Good                                      (3)
     Knife: Mediocre                                   (1)
     Knowledge, Phobias (hard): Good                   (4)
     Meditation: Good                                  (3)
     Sewing: Mediocre                                  (1)
     Stealth/Urban: Fair                               (2)
     Street Gossip: Good                               (3)
     Survival/Urban: Great                             (4)
     Use Mind Control (n-e): Great                     (6)
     Use Telepathy (n-e): Good                         (5)
     Use Telekinesis (n-e): Good                       (5)
Gifts and Faults: (2 free gifts, 6 taken, balanced by 3 faults and
         loss of 6 skills)
     Supernormal Power: Mind Control
     Supernormal Power: Telepath
     Supernormal Power: Telekinetic
     Fault: Use of Psi Requires Immobile Concentration (note that this
         isn't a superfault)
     Fault: Materially Poor
     Fault: Unlucky

6.38  Screamer (Fredrick Grant); Occupation: Decker
---------------------------------------------------

[By: Stephan Szabo]

[GM limits: 7 attributes (3 free levels); 30 free skill levels,
w/maximum of 1 Superb, 4 Greats; 2 free gifts; Cybernetic enhancements
count as gifts, not supernormal powers.]

Attributes (3 free levels, 5 taken, balanced by fault):
     Body: Good                                        (1)
     Charisma: Poor                                    (-2)
     Intelligence: Superb                              (3)
     Quickness: Good                                   (1)
     Reaction: Great                                   (2)
     Strength: Fair                                    (0)
     Willpower: Fair                                   (0)
Skills (30 Free levels, 30 taken)
     Computer Build/Repair: Great                      (4)
     Computer Programming: Superb                      (5)
     Computer Theory: Great                            (4)
     Cycle: Fair                                       (2)
     Electronics: Great                                (4)
     Firearms: Great                                   (4)
     Matrix Etiquette: Good                            (3)
     Street Etiquette: Fair                            (2)
     Unarmed Combat: Fair                              (2)
Gifts/Faults: (2 free gifts, 6 taken, balanced by faults)
     Gift: Cybernetics, Datajack
     Gift: Cybernetics, Can multitask cognitive processes
     Gift: Cybernetics, Thermographic Vision
     Gift: Cybernetics, Flash Compensation
     Gift: Cybernetics, Telescopic Sight
     Gift: Lucky
     Fault: Bloodlust
     Fault: Doesn't care if he lives or dies
     Fault: Manic/Depressive
     Fault: Multiple Personality
     Fault: Overconfident

6.39  Dragonfly (James Stoddard), Secret Superhero
--------------------------------------------------

[GM limits: 6 attributes (3 free levels); 50 free skill levels,
w/maximum of 2 Superb, 6 Greats; 2 free gifts; 4 free Superpowers]

Attributes: (3 free levels, 7 taken, balanced by faults)
     Damage Capacity: Fair                             (0)
     Dexterity: Great                                  (2)
     Health: Good                                      (1)
     Intelligence: Great                               (2)
     Intuition: Great                                  (2)
     Strength: Fair                                    (0)
Skills (50 free levels, 56 taken, balanced by fault)
     Acrobatics: Great                                 (4)
     Acting: Good                                      (3)
     Computer Use: Great                               (4)
     Control Superpower (Electron Flow) (n-e): Superb  (7)
     Control Superpower (Flight) (n-e): Good           (5)
     Criminology: Good                                 (3)
     Disguise: Good                                    (3)
     Dodge: Great                                      (4)
     Driving: Good                                     (3)
     Electronics Engineering, Computers (hard): Great  (5)
     Japanese Language (n-e): Good                     (5)
     Judo (n-e): Great                                 (6)
     Singing: Terrible                                 (-1)
     Stealth: Superb                                   (5)
Gifts & Faults: (4 free Superpowers, 4 taken; 2 free gifts, 3 taken,
         balanced by a fault)
     Gift: Combat Reflexes
     Gift: Good Looking
     Gift: Tough Hide (-1 to damage)
     Fault: Against Ethics to Use Powers to Make Money
     Fault: In Massive Debt
     Fault: Phobia of Animals Bigger than a Collie
     Fault: Socially Awkward (Bit of a Nerd)
     Superpower: Control Inanimate Electronic Devices
     Superpower: Shrink to 1" for up to an hour, 2 times/day (Scale =
         -10)
     Superpower: Fly, only while 1" high
     Superpower: Electrical Surge (Short-out Machines)

6.4  Animal & Creature Examples
-------------------------------

Non-PC animals need not be built using level limits.  Just define what
traits are essential to the animal, and let it go at that.  The
Strength Scale refers to Section 3.3, Non-humans.

Lion:
     Perception: Great
     Melee Combat: Great
     Stalking: Great
     Dodge: Fair
     Strength: Scale 2 Fair to Great
     Fault: Lazy
     Damage Capacity: Fair to Superb

Grizzly Bear:
     Perception: Good
     Melee Combat: Good
     Dodge: Fair
     Strength: Scale 3 Fair to Great
     Fault: Berserker
     Damage Capacity: Fair to Great

Cobra:
     Perception: Good
     Melee Combat: Great
     Dodge: Good
     Supernormal Power: Poison, +4 damage bonus
     Fault: Bad temper
     Damage Capacity: Poor

Skunk:
     Melee Combat: Poor
     Ranged Combat: Good, short range
     Dodge: Poor
     Supernormal Power: Noxious Fluid: blinds, incapacitates
     Damage Capacity: Terrible

Giant Spider:
     Melee Combat: Good
     Dodge: Poor
     Supernormal Power: Poison, paralyzes
     Supernormal Power: Web, (Good Strength degree task to break)
     Damage Capacity: Good

Griffin:
     Perception: Great
     Melee Combat: Great
     Dodge: Good
     Supernormal Power: Flight
     Supernormal Power: Tough Hide (light armor)
     Strength: Mediocre to Great, Scale 4
     Damage Capacity: Good to Superb

Dragon (customize to taste):
     Melee Combat: Good to Great
     Ranged Combat: Good, short range
     Dodge: Mediocre
     Supernormal Power: Fire Breath (+2 damage)
     Supernormal Power: Flight
     Supernormal Power: Tough Hide (-1 to -3)
     Supernormal Power: Charm with Eyes
     Supernormal Power: Magic Potential (some of them)
     Fault: Greedy
     Strength: Scale 3 to Scale 9, Fair to Great
     Damage Capacity: Fair to Great

[End of official FUDGE.  There is an Addenda with options and samples,
 however, available at the ftp site soda.berkeley.edu, directories
 /pub/fudge/samples and /pub/fudge/options.]
-- 
  - Steffan O'Sullivan		         sos@oz.plymouth.edu
 
